@node	3.4.2, 3.5, 3.3, 3.4
@subsection Mechanisms for Controlling Concurrency

We've seen that the difficulty in dealing with concurrent processes is rooted
in the need to consider the interleaving of the order of events in the
different processes.  For example, suppose we have two processes, one with
three ordered events @math{{(a, b, c)}} and one with three ordered events
@math{{(x, y, z)}}.  If the two processes run concurrently, with no
constraints on how their execution is interleaved, then there are 20 different
possible orderings for the events that are consistent with the individual
orderings for the two processes:

@example
(a,b,c,x,y,z)  (a,x,b,y,c,z)  (x,a,b,c,y,z)  
(x,a,y,z,b,c)  (a,b,x,c,y,z)  (a,x,b,y,z,c)  
(x,a,b,y,c,z)  (x,y,a,b,c,z)  (a,b,x,y,c,z)  
(a,x,y,b,c,z)  (x,a,b,y,z,c)  (x,y,a,b,z,c)
(a,b,x,y,z,c)  (a,x,y,b,z,c)  (x,a,y,b,c,z)  
(x,y,a,z,b,c)  (a,x,b,c,y,z)  (a,x,y,z,b,c)  
(x,a,y,b,z,c)  (x,y,z,a,b,c)
@end example

@noindent
As programmers designing this system, we would have to consider the effects of
each of these 20 orderings and check that each behavior is acceptable.  Such an
approach rapidly becomes unwieldy as the numbers of processes and events
increase.

A more practical approach to the design of concurrent systems is to devise
general mechanisms that allow us to constrain the interleaving of concurrent
processes so that we can be sure that the program behavior is correct.  Many
mechanisms have been developed for this purpose.  In this section, we describe
one of them, the @newterm{serializer}.

@subsubheading Serializing access to shared state

Serialization implements the following idea: Processes will execute
concurrently, but there will be certain collections of procedures that cannot
be executed concurrently.  More precisely, serialization creates distinguished
sets of procedures such that only one execution of a procedure in each
serialized set is permitted to happen at a time.  If some procedure in the set
is being executed, then a process that attempts to execute any procedure in the
set will be forced to wait until the first execution has finished.

We can use serialization to control access to shared variables.  For example,
if we want to update a shared variable based on the previous value of that
variable, we put the access to the previous value of the variable and the
assignment of the new value to the variable in the same procedure.  We then
ensure that no other procedure that assigns to the variable can run
concurrently with this procedure by serializing all of these procedures with
the same serializer.  This guarantees that the value of the variable cannot be
changed between an access and the corresponding assignment.

@subsubheading Serializers in Scheme

To make the above mechanism more concrete, suppose that we have extended Scheme
to include a procedure called @code{parallel-execute}:

@lisp
(parallel-execute ⟨@var{p₁}⟩ 
                  ⟨@var{p₂}⟩ 
                  @r{…} 
                  ⟨@var{pₖ}⟩)
@end lisp

@noindent
Each @code{⟨}@var{p}@code{⟩} must be a procedure of no arguments.  @code{Parallel-execute}
creates a separate process for each @code{⟨}@var{p}@code{⟩}, which applies 
@code{⟨}@var{p}@code{⟩} (to no arguments).  These processes all run
concurrently.@footnote{@code{Parallel-execute} is not part of standard Scheme,
but it can be implemented in @abbr{MIT} Scheme.  In our implementation, the
new concurrent processes also run concurrently with the original Scheme
process.  Also, in our implementation, the value returned by
@code{parallel-execute} is a special control object that can be used to halt
the newly created processes.}

As an example of how this is used, consider

@lisp
(define x 10)
(parallel-execute (lambda () (set! x (* x x)))
                  (lambda () (set! x (+ x 1))))
@end lisp

@noindent
This creates two concurrent processes---@math{P_1}, which sets @code{x} to
@code{x} times @code{x}, and @math{P_2}, which increments @code{x}.  After
execution is complete, @code{x} will be left with one of five possible values,
depending on the interleaving of the events of @math{P_1} and @math{P_2}:

@example
101: @math{P_1} sets @code{x} to 100 and then @math{P_2} increments
     @code{x} to 101.
121: @math{P_2} increments @code{x} to 11 and then @math{P_1} sets
     @code{x} to @code{x} times @code{x}.
110: @math{P_2} changes @code{x} from 10 to 11 between the 
     two times that @math{P_1} accesses the value of 
     @code{x} during the evaluation of @code{(* x x)}.
 11: @math{P_2} accesses @code{x}, then @math{P_1} sets @code{x} to 100, 
     then @math{P_2} sets @code{x}.
100: @math{P_1} accesses @code{x} (twice), then @math{P_2} sets
     @code{x} to 11, then @math{P_1} sets @code{x}.
@end example

@noindent
We can constrain the concurrency by using serialized procedures, which are
created by @newterm{serializers}. Serializers are constructed by
@code{make-serializer}, whose implementation is given below.  A serializer
takes a procedure as argument and returns a serialized procedure that behaves
like the original procedure.  All calls to a given serializer return serialized
procedures in the same set.

Thus, in contrast to the example above, executing

@lisp
(define x 10)
(define s (make-serializer))
(parallel-execute 
 (s (lambda () (set! x (* x x))))
 (s (lambda () (set! x (+ x 1)))))
@end lisp

@noindent
can produce only two possible values for @code{x}, 101 or 121.  The other
possibilities are eliminated, because the execution of @math{P_1} and @math{P_2}
cannot be interleaved.

Here is a version of the @code{make-account} procedure from 
@ref{3.1.1}, where the deposits and withdrawals have been serialized:

@lisp
(define (make-account balance)
  (define (withdraw amount)
    (if (>= balance amount)
        (begin (set! balance 
                     (- balance amount))
               balance)
        "Insufficient funds"))
  (define (deposit amount)
    (set! balance (+ balance amount))
    balance)
  (let ((protected (make-serializer)))
    (define (dispatch m)
      (cond ((eq? m 'withdraw) 
             (protected withdraw))
            ((eq? m 'deposit) 
             (protected deposit))
            ((eq? m 'balance) 
             balance)
            (else (error "Unknown request: 
                          MAKE-ACCOUNT"
                         m))))
    dispatch))
@end lisp

@noindent
With this implementation, two processes cannot be withdrawing from or
depositing into a single account concurrently.  This eliminates the source of
the error illustrated in @ref{Figure 3.29}, where Peter changes the account
balance between the times when Paul accesses the balance to compute the new
value and when Paul actually performs the assignment.  On the other hand, each
account has its own serializer, so that deposits and withdrawals for different
accounts can proceed concurrently.

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 3.39}Exercise 3.39:} Which of the five possibilities
in the parallel execution shown above remain if we instead serialize execution
as follows:

@lisp
(define x 10)
(define s (make-serializer))
(parallel-execute 
  (lambda () 
    (set! x ((s (lambda () (* x x))))))
  (s (lambda () (set! x (+ x 1)))))
@end lisp
@end quotation

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 3.40}Exercise 3.40:} Give all possible values of
@code{x} that can result from executing

@lisp
(define x 10)
(parallel-execute 
 (lambda () (set! x (* x x)))
 (lambda () (set! x (* x x x))))
@end lisp

Which of these possibilities remain if we instead use serialized procedures:

@lisp
(define x 10)
(define s (make-serializer))
(parallel-execute 
 (s (lambda () (set! x (* x x))))
 (s (lambda () (set! x (* x x x)))))
@end lisp
@end quotation

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 3.41}Exercise 3.41:} Ben Bitdiddle worries that it
would be better to implement the bank account as follows (where the commented
line has been changed):

@lisp
(define (make-account balance)
  (define (withdraw amount)
    (if (>= balance amount)
        (begin 
          (set! balance 
                (- balance amount))
          balance)
        "Insufficient funds"))
  (define (deposit amount)
    (set! balance (+ balance amount))
    balance)
  (let ((protected (make-serializer)))
    (define (dispatch m)
      (cond ((eq? m 'withdraw) 
             (protected withdraw))
            ((eq? m 'deposit) 
             (protected deposit))
            ((eq? m 'balance)
             ((protected 
                (lambda () 
                  balance)))) @r{; serialized}
            (else 
             (error 
              "Unknown request: 
               MAKE-ACCOUNT"
              m))))
    dispatch))
@end lisp

@noindent
because allowing unserialized access to the bank balance can result in
anomalous behavior.  Do you agree?  Is there any scenario that demonstrates
Ben's concern?
@end quotation

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 3.42}Exercise 3.42:} Ben Bitdiddle suggests that it's
a waste of time to create a new serialized procedure in response to every
@code{withdraw} and @code{deposit} message.  He says that @code{make-account}
could be changed so that the calls to @code{protected} are done outside the
@code{dispatch} procedure.  That is, an account would return the same
serialized procedure (which was created at the same time as the account) each
time it is asked for a withdrawal procedure.

@lisp
(define (make-account balance)
  (define (withdraw amount)
    (if (>= balance amount)
        (begin (set! balance 
                     (- balance amount))
               balance)
        "Insufficient funds"))
  (define (deposit amount)
    (set! balance (+ balance amount))
    balance)
  (let ((protected (make-serializer)))
    (let ((protected-withdraw 
           (protected withdraw))
          (protected-deposit 
           (protected deposit)))
      (define (dispatch m)
        (cond ((eq? m 'withdraw) 
               protected-withdraw)
              ((eq? m 'deposit) 
               protected-deposit)
              ((eq? m 'balance) 
               balance)
              (else 
               (error "Unknown request: 
                       MAKE-ACCOUNT"
                      m))))
      dispatch)))
@end lisp

Is this a safe change to make?  In particular, is there any difference in what
concurrency is allowed by these two versions of @code{make-account}?
@end quotation

@subsubheading Complexity of using multiple shared resources

Serializers provide a powerful abstraction that helps isolate the complexities
of concurrent programs so that they can be dealt with carefully and (hopefully)
correctly.  However, while using serializers is relatively straightforward when
there is only a single shared resource (such as a single bank account),
concurrent programming can be treacherously difficult when there are multiple
shared resources.

To illustrate one of the difficulties that can arise, suppose we wish to swap
the balances in two bank accounts.  We access each account to find the balance,
compute the difference between the balances, withdraw this difference from one
account, and deposit it in the other account.  We could implement this as
follows:@footnote{We have simplified @code{exchange} by exploiting the fact
that our @code{deposit} message accepts negative amounts.  (This is a serious
bug in our banking system!)}

@lisp
(define (exchange account1 account2)
  (let ((difference (- (account1 'balance)
                       (account2 'balance))))
    ((account1 'withdraw) difference)
    ((account2 'deposit) difference)))
@end lisp

@noindent
This procedure works well when only a single process is trying to do the
exchange.  Suppose, however, that Peter and Paul both have access to accounts
@math{{a1}}, @math{{a2}}, and @math{{a3}}, and that Peter exchanges @math{{a1}} and @math{{a2}} while
Paul concurrently exchanges @math{{a1}} and @math{{a3}}.  Even with account deposits and
withdrawals serialized for individual accounts (as in the @code{make-account}
procedure shown above in this section), @code{exchange} can still produce
incorrect results.  For example, Peter might compute the difference in the
balances for @math{{a1}} and @math{{a2}}, but then Paul might change the balance in
@math{{a1}} before Peter is able to complete the exchange.@footnote{If the account
balances start out as $10, $20, and $30, then after any number of concurrent
exchanges, the balances should still be $10, $20, and $30 in some order.
Serializing the deposits to individual accounts is not sufficient to guarantee
this.  See @ref{Exercise 3.43}.}  For correct behavior, we must arrange for the
@code{exchange} procedure to lock out any other concurrent accesses to the
accounts during the entire time of the exchange.

One way we can accomplish this is by using both accounts' serializers to
serialize the entire @code{exchange} procedure.  To do this, we will arrange
for access to an account's serializer.  Note that we are deliberately breaking
the modularity of the bank-account object by exposing the serializer.  The
following version of @code{make-account} is identical to the original version
given in @ref{3.1.1}, except that a serializer is provided to protect
the balance variable, and the serializer is exported via message passing:

@lisp
(define (make-account-and-serializer balance)
  (define (withdraw amount)
    (if (>= balance amount)
        (begin 
          (set! balance (- balance amount))
          balance)
        "Insufficient funds"))
  (define (deposit amount)
    (set! balance (+ balance amount))
    balance)
  (let ((balance-serializer 
         (make-serializer)))
    (define (dispatch m)
      (cond ((eq? m 'withdraw) withdraw)
            ((eq? m 'deposit) deposit)
            ((eq? m 'balance) balance)
            ((eq? m 'serializer) 
             balance-serializer)
            (else (error "Unknown request: 
                          MAKE-ACCOUNT"
                         m))))
    dispatch))
@end lisp

@noindent
We can use this to do serialized deposits and withdrawals.  However, unlike our
earlier serialized account, it is now the responsibility of each user of
bank-account objects to explicitly manage the serialization, for example as
follows:@footnote{@ref{Exercise 3.45} investigates why deposits and withdrawals
are no longer automatically serialized by the account.}

@lisp
(define (deposit account amount)
  (let ((s (account 'serializer))
        (d (account 'deposit)))
    ((s d) amount)))
@end lisp

@noindent
Exporting the serializer in this way gives us enough flexibility to implement a
serialized exchange program.  We simply serialize the original @code{exchange}
procedure with the serializers for both accounts:

@lisp
(define (serialized-exchange account1 account2)
  (let ((serializer1 (account1 'serializer))
        (serializer2 (account2 'serializer)))
    ((serializer1 (serializer2 exchange))
     account1
     account2)))
@end lisp

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 3.43}Exercise 3.43:} Suppose that the balances in
three accounts start out as $10, $20, and $30, and that multiple processes run,
exchanging the balances in the accounts.  Argue that if the processes are run
sequentially, after any number of concurrent exchanges, the account balances
should be $10, $20, and $30 in some order.  Draw a timing diagram like the one
in @ref{Figure 3.29} to show how this condition can be violated if the
exchanges are implemented using the first version of the account-exchange
program in this section.  On the other hand, argue that even with this
@code{exchange} program, the sum of the balances in the accounts will be
preserved.  Draw a timing diagram to show how even this condition would be
violated if we did not serialize the transactions on individual accounts.
@end quotation

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 3.44}Exercise 3.44:} Consider the problem of
transferring an amount from one account to another.  Ben Bitdiddle claims that
this can be accomplished with the following procedure, even if there are
multiple people concurrently transferring money among multiple accounts, using
any account mechanism that serializes deposit and withdrawal transactions, for
example, the version of @code{make-account} in the text above.

@lisp
(define 
  (transfer from-account to-account amount)
  ((from-account 'withdraw) amount)
  ((to-account 'deposit) amount))
@end lisp

Louis Reasoner claims that there is a problem here, and that we need to use a
more sophisticated method, such as the one required for dealing with the
exchange problem.  Is Louis right?  If not, what is the essential difference
between the transfer problem and the exchange problem?  (You should assume that
the balance in @code{from-account} is at least @code{amount}.)
@end quotation

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 3.45}Exercise 3.45:} Louis Reasoner thinks our
bank-account system is unnecessarily complex and error-prone now that deposits
and withdrawals aren't automatically serialized.  He suggests that
@code{make-account-and-serializer} should have exported the serializer (for use
by such procedures as @code{serialized-exchange}) in addition to (rather than
instead of) using it to serialize accounts and deposits as @code{make-account}
did.  He proposes to redefine accounts as follows:

@lisp
(define 
  (make-account-and-serializer balance)
  (define (withdraw amount)
    (if (>= balance amount)
        (begin (set! balance 
                     (- balance amount))
               balance)
        "Insufficient funds"))
  (define (deposit amount)
    (set! balance (+ balance amount))
    balance)
  (let ((balance-serializer 
         (make-serializer)))
    (define (dispatch m)
      (cond ((eq? m 'withdraw) 
             (balance-serializer withdraw))
            ((eq? m 'deposit) 
             (balance-serializer deposit))
            ((eq? m 'balance) 
             balance)
            ((eq? m 'serializer) 
             balance-serializer)
            (else (error "Unknown request: 
                          MAKE-ACCOUNT"
                         m))))
    dispatch))
@end lisp

Then deposits are handled as with the original @code{make-account}:

@lisp
(define (deposit account amount)
  ((account 'deposit) amount))
@end lisp

Explain what is wrong with Louis's reasoning.  In particular, consider what
happens when @code{serialized-exchange} is called.
@end quotation

@subsubheading Implementing serializers

We implement serializers in terms of a more primitive synchronization mechanism
called a @newterm{mutex}.  A mutex is an object that supports two
operations---the mutex can be @newterm{acquired}, and the mutex can be
@newterm{released}.  Once a mutex has been acquired, no other acquire
operations on that mutex may proceed until the mutex is released.@footnote{The
term ``mutex'' is an abbreviation for @newterm{mutual exclusion}.  The general
problem of arranging a mechanism that permits concurrent processes to safely
share resources is called the mutual exclusion problem.  Our mutex is a simple
variant of the @newterm{semaphore} mechanism (see @ref{Exercise 3.47}), which
was introduced in the ``THE'' Multiprogramming System developed at the
Technological University of Eindhoven and named for the university's initials
in Dutch (@ref{Dijkstra 1968a}).  The acquire and release operations were originally
called P and V, from the Dutch words @emph{passeren} (to pass) and
@emph{vrijgeven} (to release), in reference to the semaphores used on railroad
systems.  Dijkstra's classic exposition (@ref{1968b}) was one of the first to clearly
present the issues of concurrency control, and showed how to use semaphores to
handle a variety of concurrency problems.} In our implementation, each
serializer has an associated mutex.  Given a procedure @code{p}, the serializer
returns a procedure that acquires the mutex, runs @code{p}, and then releases
the mutex.  This ensures that only one of the procedures produced by the
serializer can be running at once, which is precisely the serialization
property that we need to guarantee.

@lisp
(define (make-serializer)
  (let ((mutex (make-mutex)))
    (lambda (p)
      (define (serialized-p . args)
        (mutex 'acquire)
        (let ((val (apply p args)))
          (mutex 'release)
          val))
      serialized-p)))
@end lisp

@noindent
The mutex is a mutable object (here we'll use a one-element list, which we'll
refer to as a @newterm{cell}) that can hold the value true or false.  When the
value is false, the mutex is available to be acquired.  When the value is true,
the mutex is unavailable, and any process that attempts to acquire the mutex
must wait.

Our mutex constructor @code{make-mutex} begins by initializing the cell
contents to false.  To acquire the mutex, we test the cell.  If the mutex is
available, we set the cell contents to true and proceed.  Otherwise, we wait in
a loop, attempting to acquire over and over again, until we find that the mutex
is available.@footnote{In most time-shared operating systems, processes that
are blocked by a mutex do not waste time ``busy-waiting'' as above.  Instead,
the system schedules another process to run while the first is waiting, and the
blocked process is awakened when the mutex becomes available.}  To release the
mutex, we set the cell contents to false.

@lisp
(define (make-mutex)
  (let ((cell (list false)))
    (define (the-mutex m)
      (cond ((eq? m 'acquire)
             (if (test-and-set! cell)
                 (the-mutex 'acquire))) @r{; retry}
            ((eq? m 'release) (clear! cell))))
    the-mutex))
(define (clear! cell) (set-car! cell false))
@end lisp

@noindent
@code{Test-and-set!} tests the cell and returns the result of the test.  In
addition, if the test was false, @code{test-and-set!} sets the cell contents to
true before returning false.  We can express this behavior as the following
procedure:

@lisp
(define (test-and-set! cell)
  (if (car cell)
      true
      (begin (set-car! cell true)
             false)))
@end lisp

@noindent
However, this implementation of @code{test-and-set!} does not suffice as it
stands.  There is a crucial subtlety here, which is the essential place where
concurrency control enters the system: The @code{test-and-set!} operation must
be performed @newterm{atomically}.  That is, we must guarantee that, once a
process has tested the cell and found it to be false, the cell contents will
actually be set to true before any other process can test the cell.  If we do
not make this guarantee, then the mutex can fail in a way similar to the
bank-account failure in @ref{Figure 3.29}.  (See @ref{Exercise 3.46}.)

The actual implementation of @code{test-and-set!} depends on the details of how
our system runs concurrent processes.  For example, we might be executing
concurrent processes on a sequential processor using a time-slicing mechanism
that cycles through the processes, permitting each process to run for a short
time before interrupting it and moving on to the next process.  In that case,
@code{test-and-set!}  can work by disabling time slicing during the testing and
setting.@footnote{In @abbr{MIT} Scheme for a single processor, which uses a
time-slicing model, @code{test-and-set!} can be implemented as follows:

@lisp
(define (test-and-set! cell)
  (without-interrupts
   (lambda ()
     (if (car cell)
         true
         (begin (set-car! cell true)
                false)))))
@end lisp

@code{Without-interrupts} disables time-slicing interrupts while its procedure
ar@-gu@-ment is being executed.}  Alternatively, multiprocessing computers provide
instructions that support atomic operations directly in
hardware.@footnote{There are many variants of such instructions---including
test-and-set, test-and-clear, swap, compare-and-exchange, load-reserve, and
store-conditional---whose design must be carefully matched to the machine's
processor-memory interface.  One issue that arises here is to determine what
happens if two processes attempt to acquire the same resource at exactly the
same time by using such an instruction.  This requires some mechanism for
making a decision about which process gets control.  Such a mechanism is called
an @newterm{arbiter}.  Arbiters usually boil down to some sort of hardware
device.  Unfortunately, it is possible to prove that one cannot physically
construct a fair arbiter that works 100% of the time unless one allows the
arbiter an arbitrarily long time to make its decision.  The fundamental
phenomenon here was originally observed by the fourteenth-century French
philosopher Jean Buridan in his commentary on Aristotle's @i{De caelo}.
Buridan argued that a perfectly rational dog placed between two equally
attractive sources of food will starve to death, because it is incapable of
deciding which to go to first.}

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 3.46}Exercise 3.46:} Suppose that we implement
@code{test-and-set!}  using an ordinary procedure as shown in the text, without
attempting to make the operation atomic.  Draw a timing diagram like the one in
@ref{Figure 3.29} to demonstrate how the mutex implementation can fail by
allowing two processes to acquire the mutex at the same time.
@end quotation

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 3.47}Exercise 3.47:} A semaphore (of size @math{n}) is a
generalization of a mutex.  Like a mutex, a semaphore supports acquire and
release operations, but it is more general in that up to @math{n} processes can
acquire it concurrently.  Additional processes that attempt to acquire the
semaphore must wait for release operations.  Give implementations of semaphores

@enumerate a

@item
in terms of mutexes

@item
in terms of atomic @code{test-and-set!} operations.

@end enumerate
@end quotation

@subsubheading Deadlock

Now that we have seen how to implement serializers, we can see that account
exchanging still has a problem, even with the @code{serialized-exchange}
procedure above.  Imagine that Peter attempts to exchange @math{{a1}} with @math{{a2}}
while Paul concurrently attempts to exchange @math{{a2}} with @math{{a1}}.  Suppose that
Peter's process reaches the point where it has entered a serialized procedure
protecting @math{{a1}} and, just after that, Paul's process enters a serialized
procedure protecting @math{{a2}}.  Now Peter cannot proceed (to enter a serialized
procedure protecting @math{{a2}}) until Paul exits the serialized procedure
protecting @math{{a2}}.  Similarly, Paul cannot proceed until Peter exits the
serialized procedure protecting @math{{a1}}.  Each process is stalled forever,
waiting for the other.  This situation is called a @newterm{deadlock}.
Deadlock is always a danger in systems that provide concurrent access to
multiple shared resources.

One way to avoid the deadlock in this situation is to give each account a
unique identification number and rewrite @code{serialized-exchange} so that a
process will always attempt to enter a procedure protecting the lowest-numbered
account first.  Although this method works well for the exchange problem, there
are other situations that require more sophisticated deadlock-avoidance
techniques, or where deadlock cannot be avoided at all.  (See @ref{Exercise 3.48} 
and @ref{Exercise 3.49}.)@footnote{The general technique for avoiding
deadlock by numbering the shared resources and acquiring them in order is due
to @ref{Havender (1968)}.  Situations where deadlock cannot be avoided require
@newterm{deadlock-recovery} methods, which entail having processes ``back out''
of the deadlocked state and try again.  Deadlock-recovery mechanisms are widely
used in database management systems, a topic that is treated in detail in 
@ref{Gray and Reuter 1993}.}

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 3.48}Exercise 3.48:} Explain in detail why the
deadlock-avoidance method described above, (i.e., the accounts are numbered,
and each process attempts to acquire the smaller-numbered account first) avoids
deadlock in the exchange problem.  Rewrite @code{serialized-exchange} to
incorporate this idea.  (You will also need to modify @code{make-account} so
that each account is created with a number, which can be accessed by sending an
appropriate message.)
@end quotation

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 3.49}Exercise 3.49:} Give a scenario where the
deadlock-avoidance mechanism described above does not work.  (Hint: In the
exchange problem, each process knows in advance which accounts it will need to
get access to.  Consider a situation where a process must get access to some
shared resources before it can know which additional shared resources it will
require.)
@end quotation

@subsubheading Concurrency, time, and communication

We've seen how programming concurrent systems requires controlling the ordering
of events when different processes access shared state, and we've seen how to
achieve this control through judicious use of serializers.  But the problems of
concurrency lie deeper than this, because, from a fundamental point of view,
it's not always clear what is meant by ``shared state.''

Mechanisms such as @code{test-and-set!} require processes to examine a global
shared flag at arbitrary times.  This is problematic and inefficient to
implement in modern high-speed processors, where due to optimization techniques
such as pipelining and cached memory, the contents of memory may not be in a
consistent state at every instant.  In contemporary multiprocessing systems,
therefore, the serializer paradigm is being supplanted by new approaches to
concurrency control.@footnote{One such alternative to serialization is called
@newterm{barrier synchronization}.  The programmer permits concurrent processes
to execute as they please, but establishes certain synchronization points
(``barriers'') through which no process can proceed until all the processes
have reached the barrier.  Modern processors provide machine instructions that
permit programmers to establish synchronization points at places where
consistency is required.  The @abbr{PowerPC}, for example, includes for
this purpose two instructions called @abbr{SYNC} and @abbr{EIEIO} 
(Enforced In-order Execution of Input/Output).}

The problematic aspects of shared state also arise in large, distributed
systems.  For instance, imagine a distributed banking system where individual
branch banks maintain local values for bank balances and periodically compare
these with values maintained by other branches.  In such a system the value of
``the account balance'' would be undetermined, except right after
synchronization.  If Peter deposits money in an account he holds jointly with
Paul, when should we say that the account balance has changed---when the
balance in the local branch changes, or not until after the synchronization?
And if Paul accesses the account from a different branch, what are the
reasonable constraints to place on the banking system such that the behavior is
``correct''?  The only thing that might matter for correctness is the behavior
observed by Peter and Paul individually and the ``state'' of the account
immediately after synchronization.  Questions about the ``real'' account
balance or the order of events between synchronizations may be irrelevant or
meaningless.@footnote{This may seem like a strange point of view, but there are
systems that work this way.  International charges to credit-card accounts, for
example, are normally cleared on a per-country basis, and the charges made in
different countries are periodically reconciled.  Thus the account balance may
be different in different countries.}

The basic phenomenon here is that synchronizing different processes,
establishing shared state, or imposing an order on events requires
communication among the processes.  In essence, any notion of time in
concurrency control must be intimately tied to communication.@footnote{For
distributed systems, this perspective was pursued by @ref{Lamport (1978)}, who showed
how to use communication to establish ``global clocks'' that can be used to
establish orderings on events in distributed systems.}  It is intriguing that a
similar connection between time and communication also arises in the Theory of
Relativity, where the speed of light (the fastest signal that can be used to
synchronize events) is a fundamental constant relating time and space.  The
complexities we encounter in dealing with time and state in our computational
models may in fact mirror a fundamental complexity of the physical universe.

