@node	2.1, 2.2, Chapter 2, Chapter 2
@section Introduction to Data Abstraction

In @ref{1.1.8}, we noted that a procedure used as an element in
creating a more complex procedure could be regarded not only as a collection of
particular operations but also as a procedural abstraction.  That is, the
details of how the procedure was implemented could be suppressed, and the
particular procedure itself could be replaced by any other procedure with the
same overall behavior.  In other words, we could make an abstraction that would
separate the way the procedure would be used from the details of how the
procedure would be implemented in terms of more primitive procedures.  The
analogous notion for compound data is called @newterm{data abstraction}.  Data
abstraction is a methodology that enables us to isolate how a compound data
object is used from the details of how it is constructed from more primitive
data objects.

The basic idea of data abstraction is to structure the programs that are to use
compound data objects so that they operate on ``abstract data.'' That is, our
programs should use data in such a way as to make no assumptions about the data
that are not strictly necessary for performing the task at hand.  At the same
time, a ``concrete'' data representation is defined independent of the programs
that use the data.  The interface between these two parts of our system will be
a set of procedures, called @newterm{selectors} and @newterm{constructors},
that implement the abstract data in terms of the concrete representation.  To
illustrate this technique, we will consider how to design a set of procedures
for manipulating rational numbers.

@menu
* 2.1.1::            Example: Arithmetic Operations for Rational Numbers
* 2.1.2::            Abstraction Barriers
* 2.1.3::            What Is Meant by Data?
* 2.1.4::            Extended Exercise: Interval Arithmetic
@end menu

@include ss01.texi
@include ss02.texi
@include ss03.texi
@include ss04.texi
