@node	5.5, References, 5.4, Chapter 5
@section Compilation

The explicit-control evaluator of @ref{5.4} is a register machine whose
controller interprets Scheme programs.  In this section we will see how to run
Scheme programs on a register machine whose controller is not a Scheme
interpreter.

The explicit-control evaluator machine is universal---it can carry out any
computational process that can be described in Scheme.  The evaluator's
controller orchestrates the use of its data paths to perform the desired
computation.  Thus, the evaluator's data paths are universal: They are
sufficient to perform any computation we desire, given an appropriate
controller.@footnote{This is a theoretical statement.  We are not claiming that
the evaluator's data paths are a particularly convenient or efficient set of
data paths for a general-purpose computer.  For example, they are not very good
for implementing high-performance floating-point calculations or calculations
that intensively manipulate bit vectors.}

Commercial general-purpose computers are register machines or@-gan@-ized around a
collection of registers and operations that constitute an efficient and
convenient universal set of data paths.  The controller for a general-purpose
machine is an interpreter for a register-machine language like the one we have
been using.  This language is called the @newterm{native language} of the
machine, or simply @newterm{machine language}.  Programs written in machine
language are sequences of instructions that use the machine's data paths.  For
example, the explicit-control evaluator's instruction sequence can be thought
of as a machine-language program for a general-purpose computer rather than as
the controller for a specialized interpreter machine.

There are two common strategies for bridging the gap between higher-level
languages and register-machine languages.  The explicit-control evaluator
illustrates the strategy of interpretation.  An interpreter written in the
native language of a machine configures the machine to execute programs written
in a language (called the @newterm{source language}) that may differ from the
native language of the machine performing the evaluation.  The primitive
procedures of the source language are implemented as a library of subroutines
written in the native language of the given machine.  A program to be
interpreted (called the @newterm{source program}) is represented as a data
structure.  The interpreter traverses this data structure, analyzing the source
program.  As it does so, it simulates the intended behavior of the source
program by calling appropriate primitive subroutines from the library.

In this section, we explore the alternative strategy of @newterm{compilation}.
A compiler for a given source language and machine translates a source program
into an equivalent program (called the @newterm{object program}) written in the
machine's native language.  The compiler that we implement in this section
translates programs written in Scheme into sequences of instructions to be
executed using the explicit-control evaluator machine's data
paths.@footnote{Actually, the machine that runs compiled code can be simpler
than the interpreter machine, because we won't use the @code{exp} and
@code{unev} registers.  The interpreter used these to hold pieces of
unevaluated expressions.  With the compiler, however, these expressions get
built into the compiled code that the register machine will run.  For the same
reason, we don't need the machine operations that deal with expression syntax.
But compiled code will use a few additional machine operations (to represent
compiled procedure objects) that didn't appear in the explicit-control
evaluator machine.}

Compared with interpretation, compilation can provide a great increase in the
efficiency of program execution, as we will explain below in the overview of
the compiler.  On the other hand, an interpreter provides a more powerful
environment for interactive program development and debugging, because the
source program being executed is available at run time to be examined and
modified.  In addition, because the entire library of primitives is present,
new programs can be constructed and added to the system during debugging.

In view of the complementary advantages of compilation and interpretation,
modern program-development environments pursue a mixed strategy.  Lisp
interpreters are generally organized so that interpreted procedures and
compiled procedures can call each other.  This enables a programmer to compile
those parts of a program that are assumed to be debugged, thus gaining the
efficiency advantage of compilation, while retaining the interpretive mode of
execution for those parts of the program that are in the flux of interactive
development and debugging.  In @ref{5.5.7}, after we have implemented
the compiler, we will show how to interface it with our interpreter to produce
an integrated interpreter-compiler development system.

@subsubheading An overview of the compiler

Our compiler is much like our interpreter, both in its structure and in the
function it performs.  Accordingly, the mechanisms used by the compiler for
analyzing expressions will be similar to those used by the interpreter.
Moreover, to make it easy to interface compiled and interpreted code, we will
design the compiler to generate code that obeys the same conventions of
register usage as the interpreter: The environment will be kept in the
@code{env} register, argument lists will be accumulated in @code{argl}, a
procedure to be applied will be in @code{proc}, procedures will return their
answers in @code{val}, and the location to which a procedure should return will
be kept in @code{continue}.  In general, the compiler translates a source
program into an object program that performs essentially the same register
operations as would the interpreter in evaluating the same source program.

This description suggests a strategy for implementing a rudimentary compiler:
We traverse the expression in the same way the interpreter does.  When we
encounter a register instruction that the interpreter would perform in
evaluating the expression, we do not execute the instruction but instead
accumulate it into a sequence.  The resulting sequence of instructions will be
the object code.  Observe the efficiency advantage of compilation over
interpretation.  Each time the interpreter evaluates an expression---for
example, @code{(f 84 96)}---it performs the work of classifying the expression
(discovering that this is a procedure application) and testing for the end of
the operand list (discovering that there are two operands).  With a compiler,
the expression is analyzed only once, when the instruction sequence is
generated at compile time.  The object code produced by the compiler contains
only the instructions that evaluate the operator and the two operands, assemble
the argument list, and apply the procedure (in @code{proc}) to the arguments
(in @code{argl}).

This is the same kind of optimization we implemented in the analyzing evaluator
of @ref{4.1.7}.  But there are further opportunities to gain efficiency
in compiled code.  As the interpreter runs, it follows a process that must be
applicable to any expression in the language.  In contrast, a given segment of
compiled code is meant to execute some particular expression.  This can make a
big difference, for example in the use of the stack to save registers.  When
the interpreter evaluates an expression, it must be prepared for any
contingency.  Before evaluating a subexpression, the interpreter saves all
registers that will be needed later, because the subexpression might require an
arbitrary evaluation.  A compiler, on the other hand, can exploit the structure
of the particular expression it is processing to generate code that avoids
unnecessary stack operations.

As a case in point, consider the combination @code{(f 84 96)}.  Before the
interpreter evaluates the operator of the combination, it prepares for this
evaluation by saving the registers containing the operands and the environment,
whose values will be needed later.  The interpreter then evaluates the operator
to obtain the result in @code{val}, restores the saved registers, and finally
moves the result from @code{val} to @code{proc}.  However, in the particular
expression we are dealing with, the operator is the symbol @code{f}, whose
evaluation is accomplished by the machine operation
@code{lookup-variable-value}, which does not alter any registers.  The compiler
that we implement in this section will take advantage of this fact and generate
code that evaluates the operator using the instruction

@lisp
(assign proc 
        (op lookup-variable-value)
        (const f)
        (reg env))
@end lisp

@noindent
This code not only avoids the unnecessary saves and restores but also assigns
the value of the lookup directly to @code{proc}, whereas the interpreter would
obtain the result in @code{val} and then move this to @code{proc}.

A compiler can also optimize access to the environment.  Having analyzed the
code, the compiler can in many cases know in which frame a particular variable
will be located and access that frame directly, rather than performing the
@code{lookup-variable-value} search.  We will discuss how to implement such
variable access in @ref{5.5.6}.  Until then, however, we will focus on
the kind of register and stack optimizations described above.  There are many
other optimizations that can be performed by a compiler, such as coding
primitive operations ``in line'' instead of using a general @code{apply}
mechanism (see @ref{Exercise 5.38}); but we will not emphasize these here.  Our
main goal in this section is to illustrate the compilation process in a
simplified (but still interesting) context.

@menu
* 5.5.1::            Structure of the Compiler
* 5.5.2::            Compiling Expressions
* 5.5.3::            Compiling Combinations
* 5.5.4::            Combining Instruction Sequences
* 5.5.5::            An Example of Compiled Code
* 5.5.6::            Lexical Addressing
* 5.5.7::            Interfacing Compiled Code to the Evaluator
@end menu

@include ss01.texi
@include ss02.texi
@include ss03.texi
@include ss04.texi
@include ss05.texi
@include ss06.texi
@include ss07.texi
