@node 4.4.4.7, 4.4.4.8, 4.4.4.6, 4.4.4
@subsubsection Query Syntax Procedures

@code{Type} and @code{contents}, used by @code{qeval} (@ref{4.4.4.2}),
specify that a special form is identified by the symbol in its @code{car}.
They are the same as the @code{type-tag} and @code{contents} procedures in
@ref{2.4.2}, except for the error message.

@lisp
(define (type exp)
  (if (pair? exp)
      (car exp)
      (error "Unknown expression TYPE"
             exp)))

(define (contents exp)
  (if (pair? exp)
      (cdr exp)
      (error "Unknown expression CONTENTS"
             exp)))
@end lisp

@noindent
The following procedures, used by @code{query-driver-loop} (in 
@ref{4.4.4.1}), specify that rules and assertions are added to the data base by
expressions of the form @code{(assert! ⟨@var{rule-or-assertion}⟩)}:

@lisp
(define (assertion-to-be-added? exp)
  (eq? (type exp) 'assert!))

(define (add-assertion-body exp)
  (car (contents exp)))
@end lisp

@noindent
Here are the syntax definitions for the @code{and}, @code{or}, @code{not}, and
@code{lisp-value} special forms (@ref{4.4.4.2}):

@lisp
(define (empty-conjunction? exps) (null? exps))
(define (first-conjunct exps) (car exps))
(define (rest-conjuncts exps) (cdr exps))
(define (empty-disjunction? exps) (null? exps))
(define (first-disjunct exps) (car exps))
(define (rest-disjuncts exps) (cdr exps))
(define (negated-query exps) (car exps))
(define (predicate exps) (car exps))
(define (args exps) (cdr exps))
@end lisp

@noindent
The following three procedures define the syntax of rules:

@lisp
(define (rule? statement)
  (tagged-list? statement 'rule))

(define (conclusion rule) (cadr rule))

(define (rule-body rule)
  (if (null? (cddr rule))
      '(always-true)
      (caddr rule)))
@end lisp

@noindent
@code{Query-driver-loop} (@ref{4.4.4.1}) calls
@code{query-syntax-process} to transform pattern variables in the expression,
which have the form @code{?symbol}, into the internal format @code{(? symbol)}.
That is to say, a pattern such as @code{(job ?x ?y)} is actually represented
internally by the system as @code{(job (? x) (? y))}.  This increases the
efficiency of query processing, since it means that the system can check to see
if an expression is a pattern variable by checking whether the @code{car} of
the expression is the symbol @code{?}, rather than having to extract characters
from the symbol.  The syntax transformation is accomplished by the following
procedure:@footnote{Most Lisp systems give the user the ability to modify the
ordinary @code{read} procedure to perform such transformations by defining
@newterm{reader macro characters}.  Quoted expressions are already handled in
this way: The reader automatically translates @code{'expression} into
@code{(quote expression)} before the evaluator sees it.  We could arrange for
@code{?expression} to be transformed into @code{(? expression)} in the same
way; however, for the sake of clarity we have included the transformation
procedure here explicitly.

@code{Expand-question-mark} and @code{contract-question-mark} use several
procedures with @code{string} in their names.  These are Scheme primitives.}

@lisp
(define (query-syntax-process exp)
  (map-over-symbols expand-question-mark exp))

(define (map-over-symbols proc exp)
  (cond ((pair? exp)
         (cons (map-over-symbols 
                proc (car exp))
               (map-over-symbols 
                proc (cdr exp))))
        ((symbol? exp) (proc exp))
        (else exp)))

(define (expand-question-mark symbol)
  (let ((chars (symbol->string symbol)))
    (if (string=? (substring chars 0 1) "?")
        (list '? (string->symbol
                  (substring
                   chars 
                   1 
                   (string-length chars))))
        symbol)))
@end lisp

@noindent
Once the variables are transformed in this way, the variables in a pattern are
lists starting with @code{?}, and the constant symbols (which need to be
recognized for data-base indexing, @ref{4.4.4.5}) are just the symbols.

@lisp
(define (var? exp) (tagged-list? exp '?))
(define (constant-symbol? exp) (symbol? exp))
@end lisp

@noindent
Unique variables are constructed during rule application (in 
@ref{4.4.4.4}) by means of the following procedures.  The unique identifier for
a rule application is a number, which is incremented each time a rule is
applied.

@lisp
(define rule-counter 0)

(define (new-rule-application-id)
  (set! rule-counter (+ 1 rule-counter))
  rule-counter)

(define (make-new-variable 
         var rule-application-id)
  (cons '? (cons rule-application-id
                 (cdr var))))
@end lisp

@noindent
When @code{query-driver-loop} instantiates the query to print the answer, it
converts any unbound pattern variables back to the right form for printing,
using

@lisp
(define (contract-question-mark variable)
  (string->symbol
   (string-append "?"
     (if (number? (cadr variable))
         (string-append
          (symbol->string (caddr variable))
          "-"
          (number->string (cadr variable)))
         (symbol->string (cadr variable))))))
@end lisp

