@node 4.4.4.5, 4.4.4.6, 4.4.4.4, 4.4.4
@subsubsection Maintaining the Data Base

One important problem in designing logic programming languages is that of
arranging things so that as few irrelevant data-base entries as possible will
be examined in checking a given pattern.  In our system, in addition to storing
all assertions in one big stream, we store all assertions whose @code{car}s are
constant symbols in separate streams, in a table indexed by the symbol.  To
fetch an assertion that may match a pattern, we first check to see if the
@code{car} of the pattern is a constant symbol.  If so, we return (to be tested
using the matcher) all the stored assertions that have the same @code{car}.  If
the pattern's @code{car} is not a constant symbol, we return all the stored
assertions.  Cleverer methods could also take advantage of information in the
frame, or try also to optimize the case where the @code{car} of the pattern is
not a constant symbol.  We avoid building our criteria for indexing (using the
@code{car}, handling only the case of constant symbols) into the program;
instead we call on predicates and selectors that embody our criteria.

@lisp
(define THE-ASSERTIONS the-empty-stream)

(define (fetch-assertions pattern frame)
  (if (use-index? pattern)
      (get-indexed-assertions pattern)
      (get-all-assertions)))

(define (get-all-assertions) THE-ASSERTIONS)

(define (get-indexed-assertions pattern)
  (get-stream (index-key-of pattern)
              'assertion-stream))
@end lisp

@noindent
@code{Get-stream} looks up a stream in the table and returns an empty stream if
nothing is stored there.

@lisp
(define (get-stream key1 key2)
  (let ((s (get key1 key2)))
    (if s s the-empty-stream)))
@end lisp

@noindent
Rules are stored similarly, using the @code{car} of the rule conclusion.  Rule
conclusions are arbitrary patterns, however, so they differ from assertions in
that they can contain variables.  A pattern whose @code{car} is a constant
symbol can match rules whose conclusions start with a variable as well as rules
whose conclusions have the same @code{car}.  Thus, when fetching rules that
might match a pattern whose @code{car} is a constant symbol we fetch all rules
whose conclusions start with a variable as well as those whose conclusions have
the same @code{car} as the pattern.  For this purpose we store all rules whose
conclusions start with a variable in a separate stream in our table, indexed by
the symbol @code{?}.

@lisp
(define THE-RULES the-empty-stream)

(define (fetch-rules pattern frame)
  (if (use-index? pattern)
      (get-indexed-rules pattern)
      (get-all-rules)))

(define (get-all-rules) THE-RULES)

(define (get-indexed-rules pattern)
  (stream-append
   (get-stream (index-key-of pattern)
               'rule-stream)
   (get-stream '? 'rule-stream)))
@end lisp

@noindent
@code{Add-rule-or-assertion!} is used by @code{query-driver-loop} to add
assertions and rules to the data base.  Each item is stored in the index, if
appropriate, and in a stream of all assertions or rules in the data base.

@lisp
(define (add-rule-or-assertion! assertion)
  (if (rule? assertion)
      (add-rule! assertion)
      (add-assertion! assertion)))

(define (add-assertion! assertion)
  (store-assertion-in-index assertion)
  (let ((old-assertions THE-ASSERTIONS))
    (set! THE-ASSERTIONS
          (cons-stream assertion 
                       old-assertions))
    'ok))

(define (add-rule! rule)
  (store-rule-in-index rule)
  (let ((old-rules THE-RULES))
    (set! THE-RULES
          (cons-stream rule old-rules))
    'ok))
@end lisp

@noindent
To actually store an assertion or a rule, we check to see if it can be indexed.
If so, we store it in the appropriate stream.

@lisp
(define (store-assertion-in-index assertion)
  (if (indexable? assertion)
      (let ((key (index-key-of assertion)))
        (let ((current-assertion-stream
               (get-stream 
                key 'assertion-stream)))
          (put key
               'assertion-stream
               (cons-stream 
                assertion
                current-assertion-stream))))))

(define (store-rule-in-index rule)
  (let ((pattern (conclusion rule)))
    (if (indexable? pattern)
        (let ((key (index-key-of pattern)))
          (let ((current-rule-stream
                 (get-stream 
                  key 'rule-stream)))
            (put key
                 'rule-stream
                 (cons-stream 
                  rule
                  current-rule-stream)))))))
@end lisp

@noindent
The following procedures define how the data-base index is used.  A pattern (an
assertion or a rule conclusion) will be stored in the table if it starts with a
variable or a constant symbol.

@lisp
(define (indexable? pat)
  (or (constant-symbol? (car pat))
      (var? (car pat))))
@end lisp

@noindent
The key under which a pattern is stored in the table is either @code{?} (if it
starts with a variable) or the constant symbol with which it starts.

@lisp
(define (index-key-of pat)
  (let ((key (car pat)))
    (if (var? key) '? key)))
@end lisp

@noindent
The index will be used to retrieve items that might match a pattern if the
pattern starts with a constant symbol.

@lisp
(define (use-index? pat)
  (constant-symbol? (car pat)))
@end lisp

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 4.70}Exercise 4.70:} What is the purpose of the
@code{let} bindings in the procedures @code{add-assertion!} and
@code{add-rule!}?  What would be wrong with the following implementation of
@code{add-assertion!}?  Hint: Recall the definition of the infinite stream of
ones in @ref{3.5.2}: @code{(define ones (cons-stream 1 ones))}.

@lisp
(define (add-assertion! assertion)
  (store-assertion-in-index assertion)
  (set! THE-ASSERTIONS
        (cons-stream assertion 
                     THE-ASSERTIONS))
  'ok)
@end lisp
@end quotation

