@node 4.4.4.2, 4.4.4.3, 4.4.4.1, 4.4.4
@subsubsection The Evaluator

The @code{qeval} procedure, called by the @code{query-driver-loop}, is the
basic evaluator of the query system.  It takes as inputs a query and a stream
of frames, and it returns a stream of extended frames.  It identifies special
forms by a data-directed dispatch using @code{get} and @code{put}, just as we
did in implementing generic operations in @ref{Chapter 2}.  Any query that is
not identified as a special form is assumed to be a simple query, to be
processed by @code{simple-query}.

@lisp
(define (qeval query frame-stream)
  (let ((qproc (get (type query) 'qeval)))
    (if qproc
        (qproc (contents query) frame-stream)
        (simple-query query frame-stream))))
@end lisp

@noindent
@code{Type} and @code{contents}, defined in @ref{4.4.4.7}, implement
the abstract syntax of the special forms.

@subsubheading Simple queries

The @code{simple-query} procedure handles simple queries.  It takes as
arguments a simple query (a pattern) together with a stream of frames, and it
returns the stream formed by extending each frame by all data-base matches of
the query.

@lisp
(define (simple-query query-pattern 
                      frame-stream)
  (stream-flatmap
   (lambda (frame)
     (stream-append-delayed
      (find-assertions query-pattern frame)
      (delay 
        (apply-rules query-pattern frame))))
   frame-stream))
@end lisp

@noindent
For each frame in the input stream, we use @code{find-assertions} 
(@ref{4.4.4.3}) to match the pattern against all assertions in the data base,
producing a stream of extended frames, and we use @code{apply-rules} 
(@ref{4.4.4.4}) to apply all possible rules, producing another stream of
extended frames.  These two streams are combined (using
@code{stream-append-delayed}, @ref{4.4.4.6}) to make a stream of all
the ways that the given pattern can be satisfied consistent with the original
frame (see @ref{Exercise 4.71}).  The streams for the individual input frames
are combined using @code{stream-flatmap} (@ref{4.4.4.6}) to form one
large stream of all the ways that any of the frames in the original input
stream can be extended to produce a match with the given pattern.

@subsubheading Compound queries

@code{And} queries are handled as illustrated in @ref{Figure 4.5} by the
@code{conjoin} procedure.  @code{Conjoin} takes as inputs the conjuncts and the
frame stream and returns the stream of extended frames.  First, @code{conjoin}
processes the stream of frames to find the stream of all possible frame
extensions that satisfy the first query in the conjunction.  Then, using this
as the new frame stream, it recursively applies @code{conjoin} to the rest of
the queries.

@lisp
(define (conjoin conjuncts frame-stream)
  (if (empty-conjunction? conjuncts)
      frame-stream
      (conjoin (rest-conjuncts conjuncts)
               (qeval 
                (first-conjunct conjuncts)
                frame-stream))))
@end lisp

@noindent
The expression

@lisp
(put 'and 'qeval conjoin)
@end lisp

@noindent
sets up @code{qeval} to dispatch to @code{conjoin} when an @code{and} form is
encountered.

@code{Or} queries are handled similarly, as shown in @ref{Figure 4.6}.  The
output streams for the various disjuncts of the @code{or} are computed
separately and merged using the @code{interleave-delayed} procedure from
@ref{4.4.4.6}.  (See @ref{Exercise 4.71} and @ref{Exercise 4.72}.)

@lisp
(define (disjoin disjuncts frame-stream)
  (if (empty-disjunction? disjuncts)
      the-empty-stream
      (interleave-delayed
       (qeval (first-disjunct disjuncts) 
              frame-stream)
       (delay (disjoin 
               (rest-disjuncts disjuncts)
               frame-stream)))))
(put 'or 'qeval disjoin)
@end lisp

@noindent
The predicates and selectors for the syntax of conjuncts and disjuncts are
given in @ref{4.4.4.7}.

@subsubheading Filters

@code{Not} is handled by the method outlined in @ref{4.4.2}.  We
attempt to extend each frame in the input stream to satisfy the query being
negated, and we include a given frame in the output stream only if it cannot be
extended.

@lisp
(define (negate operands frame-stream)
  (stream-flatmap
   (lambda (frame)
     (if (stream-null? 
          (qeval (negated-query operands)
                 (singleton-stream frame)))
         (singleton-stream frame)
         the-empty-stream))
   frame-stream))
(put 'not 'qeval negate)
@end lisp

@noindent
@code{Lisp-value} is a filter similar to @code{not}.  Each frame in the stream
is used to instantiate the variables in the pattern, the indicated predicate is
applied, and the frames for which the predicate returns false are filtered out
of the input stream.  An error results if there are unbound pattern variables.

@lisp
(define (lisp-value call frame-stream)
  (stream-flatmap
   (lambda (frame)
     (if (execute
          (instantiate
           call
           frame
           (lambda (v f)
             (error 
              "Unknown pat var: LISP-VALUE" 
              v))))
         (singleton-stream frame)
         the-empty-stream))
   frame-stream))
(put 'lisp-value 'qeval lisp-value)
@end lisp

@noindent
@code{Execute}, which applies the predicate to the arguments, must @code{eval}
the predicate expression to get the procedure to apply.  However, it must not
evaluate the arguments, since they are already the actual arguments, not
expressions whose evaluation (in Lisp) will produce the arguments.  Note that
@code{execute} is implemented using @code{eval} and @code{apply} from the
underlying Lisp system.

@lisp
(define (execute exp)
  (apply (eval (predicate exp) 
               user-initial-environment)
         (args exp)))
@end lisp

@noindent
The @code{always-true} special form provides for a query that is always
satisfied.  It ignores its contents (normally empty) and simply passes through
all the frames in the input stream.  @code{Always-true} is used by the
@code{rule-body} selector (@ref{4.4.4.7}) to provide bodies for rules
that were defined without bodies (that is, rules whose conclusions are always
satisfied).

@lisp
(define (always-true ignore frame-stream) 
  frame-stream)
(put 'always-true 'qeval always-true)
@end lisp

@noindent
The selectors that define the syntax of @code{not} and @code{lisp-value} are
given in @ref{4.4.4.7}.

