@node	1.1.4, 1.1.5, 1.1.3, 1.1
@subsection Compound Procedures

We have identified in Lisp some of the elements that must appear in any
powerful programming language:

@itemize @bullet

@item
Numbers and arithmetic operations are primitive data and procedures.

@item
Nesting of combinations provides a means of combining operations.

@item
Definitions that associate names with values provide a limited means of
abstraction.

@end itemize

@noindent
Now we will learn about @newterm{procedure definitions}, a much more powerful
abstraction technique by which a compound operation can be given a name and
then referred to as a unit.

We begin by examining how to express the idea of ``squaring.''  We might say,
``To square something, multiply it by itself.''  This is expressed in our
language as

@lisp
(define (square x) (* x x))
@end lisp

@noindent
We can understand this in the following way:

@example
(define (square x)    (*       x       x))
  |      |      |      |       |       |
 To square something, multiply it by itself.
@end example

@noindent
We have here a @newterm{compound procedure}, which has been given the name
@code{square}.  The procedure represents the operation of multiplying something
by itself.  The thing to be multiplied is given a local name, @code{x}, which
plays the same role that a pronoun plays in natural language.  Evaluating the
definition creates this compound procedure and associates it with the name
@code{square}.@footnote{Observe that there are two different operations being
combined here: we are creating the procedure, and we are giving it the name
@code{square}.  It is possible, indeed important, to be able to separate these
two notions---to create procedures without naming them, and to give names to
procedures that have already been created.  We will see how to do this in
@ref{1.3.2}.}

The general form of a procedure definition is

@lisp
(define (⟨@var{name}⟩ ⟨@var{formal parameters}⟩) ⟨@var{body}⟩)
@end lisp

@noindent
The @code{⟨}@var{name}@code{⟩} is a symbol to be associated with the procedure definition in
the environment.@footnote{Throughout this book, we will describe the general
syntax of expressions by using italic symbols delimited by angle
brackets---e.g., @code{⟨}@var{name}@code{⟩}---to denote the ``slots'' in the expression to be
filled in when such an expression is actually used.} The @code{⟨}@var{@w{formal} @w{parameters}}@code{⟩} 
are the names used within the body of the procedure to refer to
the corresponding arguments of the procedure.  The @code{⟨}@var{body}@code{⟩} is an
expression that will yield the value of the procedure application when the
formal parameters are replaced by the actual arguments to which the procedure
is applied.@footnote{More generally, the body of the procedure can be a
sequence of expressions.  In this case, the interpreter evaluates each
expression in the sequence in turn and returns the value of the final
expression as the value of the procedure application.}  The @code{⟨}@var{name}@code{⟩} and
the @code{⟨}@var{formal parameters}@code{⟩} are grouped within parentheses, just as they
would be in an actual call to the procedure being defined.

Having defined @code{square}, we can now use it:

@lisp
(square 21)
@i{441}

(square (+ 2 5))
@i{49}

(square (square 3))
@i{81}
@end lisp

@noindent
We can also use @code{square} as a building block in defining other procedures.
For example, @math{x^2 + y^2} can be expressed as

@lisp
(+ (square x) (square y))
@end lisp

@noindent
We can easily define a procedure @code{sum-of-squares} that, given any two
numbers as arguments, produces the sum of their squares:

@lisp
(define (sum-of-squares x y)
  (+ (square x) (square y)))

(sum-of-squares 3 4)
@i{25}
@end lisp

@noindent
Now we can use @code{sum-of-squares} as a building block in constructing
further procedures:

@lisp
(define (f a)
  (sum-of-squares (+ a 1) (* a 2)))

(f 5)
@i{136}
@end lisp

@noindent
Compound procedures are used in exactly the same way as primitive procedures.
Indeed, one could not tell by looking at the definition of
@code{sum-of-squares} given above whether @code{square} was built into the
interpreter, like @code{+} and @code{*}, or defined as a compound procedure.

