@node	4.2, 4.3, 4.1, Chapter 4
@section Variations on a Scheme --- Lazy Evaluation

Now that we have an evaluator expressed as a Lisp program, we can experiment
with alternative choices in language design simply by modifying the evaluator.
Indeed, new languages are often invented by first writing an evaluator that
embeds the new language within an existing high-level language.  For example,
if we wish to discuss some aspect of a proposed modification to Lisp with
another member of the Lisp community, we can supply an evaluator that embodies
the change.  The recipient can then experiment with the new evaluator and send
back comments as further modifications.  Not only does the high-level
implementation base make it easier to test and debug the evaluator; in
addition, the embedding enables the designer to snarf@footnote{Snarf: ``To
grab, especially a large document or file for the purpose of using it either
with or without the owner's permission.''  Snarf down: ``To snarf, sometimes
with the connotation of absorbing, processing, or understanding.''  (These
definitions were snarfed from @ref{Steele et al. 1983}.  See also @ref{Raymond 1993}.)}
features from the underlying language, just as our embedded Lisp evaluator uses
primitives and control structure from the underlying Lisp.  Only later (if
ever) need the designer go to the trouble of building a complete implementation
in a low-level language or in hardware.  In this section and the next we
explore some variations on Scheme that provide significant additional
expressive power.

@menu
* 4.2.1::            Normal Order and Applicative Order
* 4.2.2::            An Interpreter with Lazy Evaluation
* 4.2.3::            Streams as Lazy Lists
@end menu

@include ss01.texi
@include ss02.texi
@include ss03.texi
