@node	2.3.2, 2.3.3, 2.3.1, 2.3
@subsection Example: Symbolic Differentiation

As an illustration of symbol manipulation and a further illustration of data
abstraction, consider the design of a procedure that performs symbolic
differentiation of algebraic expressions.  We would like the procedure to take
as arguments an algebraic expression and a variable and to return the
derivative of the expression with respect to the variable.  For example, if the
arguments to the procedure are @math{{ax^2 + bx + c}} and @math{x}, the
procedure should return @math{{2ax + b}}.  Symbolic differentiation is of
special historical significance in Lisp.  It was one of the motivating examples
behind the development of a computer language for symbol manipulation.
Furthermore, it marked the beginning of the line of research that led to the
development of powerful systems for symbolic mathematical work, which are
currently being used by a growing number of applied mathematicians and
physicists.

In developing the symbolic-differentiation program, we will follow the same
strategy of data abstraction that we followed in developing the rational-number
system of @ref{2.1.1}.  That is, we will first define a differentiation
algorithm that operates on abstract objects such as ``sums,'' ``products,'' and
``variables'' without worrying about how these are to be represented.  Only
afterward will we address the representation problem.

@subsubheading The differentiation program with abstract data

In order to keep things simple, we will consider a very simple
symbolic-differentiation program that handles expressions that are built up
using only the operations of addition and multiplication with two arguments.
Differentiation of any such expression can be carried out by applying the
following reduction rules:
@ifinfo

@example
dc
-- = 0  for c a constant, or a variable different from x
dx

dx
-- = 1
dx

d(u + v)   du   dv
-------- = -- + --
   dx      dx   dx

d(uv)     / dv \     / du \
----- = u | -- | + v | -- |
 dx       \ dx /     \ dx /
@end example

@end ifinfo
@tex
\[ % :42:
{{dc \over dx} \,=\, 0,} 
  \quad {\text{for } c \text{ a constant }} {\text{or a variable }} {\text{different from } x,}
\]
@end tex
@tex
\[ % :43:
\begin{eqnarray}
{dx \over dx}         &=&   1, \\
{d(u + v) \over dx}   &=&   {du \over dx} + {dv \over dx}, \\
{d(uv) \over dx}      &=&   u \kern0.1em {dv \over dx} + v \kern0.1em {du \over dx}.
\end{eqnarray}
\]
@end tex
@noindent
Observe that the latter two rules are recursive in nature.  That is, to obtain
the derivative of a sum we first find the derivatives of the terms and add
them.  Each of the terms may in turn be an expression that needs to be
decomposed.  Decomposing into smaller and smaller pieces will eventually
produce pieces that are either constants or variables, whose derivatives will
be either 0 or 1.

To embody these rules in a procedure we indulge in a little wishful thinking,
as we did in designing the rational-number implementation.  If we had a means
for representing algebraic expressions, we should be able to tell whether an
expression is a sum, a product, a constant, or a variable.  We should be able
to extract the parts of an expression.  For a sum, for example we want to be
able to extract the addend (first term) and the augend (second term).  We
should also be able to construct expressions from parts.  Let us assume that we
already have procedures to implement the following selectors, constructors, and
predicates:

@example
(variable? e)          @r{Is @code{e} a variable?}
(same-variable? v1 v2) @r{Are @code{v1} and @code{v2} the same variable?}
(sum? e)               @r{Is @code{e} a sum?}
(addend e)             @r{Addend of the sum @code{e}.}
(augend e)             @r{Augend of the sum @code{e}.}
(make-sum a1 a2)       @r{Construct the sum of @code{a1} and @code{a2}.}
(product? e)           @r{Is @code{e} a product?}
(multiplier e)         @r{Multiplier of the product @code{e}.}
(multiplicand e)       @r{Multiplicand of the product @code{e}.}
(make-product m1 m2)   @r{Construct the product of @code{m1} and @code{m2}.}
@end example

@noindent
Using these, and the primitive predicate @code{number?}, which identifies
numbers, we can express the differentiation rules as the following procedure:

@lisp
(define (deriv exp var)
  (cond ((number? exp) 0)
        ((variable? exp)
         (if (same-variable? exp var) 1 0))
        ((sum? exp)
         (make-sum (deriv (addend exp) var)
                   (deriv (augend exp) var)))
        ((product? exp)
         (make-sum
          (make-product 
           (multiplier exp)
           (deriv (multiplicand exp) var))
          (make-product 
           (deriv (multiplier exp) var)
           (multiplicand exp))))
        (else (error "unknown expression 
                      type: DERIV" exp))))
@end lisp

@noindent
This @code{deriv} procedure incorporates the complete differentiation
algorithm.  Since it is expressed in terms of abstract data, it will work no
matter how we choose to represent algebraic expressions, as long as we design a
proper set of selectors and constructors.  This is the issue we must address
next.

@subsubheading Representing algebraic expressions

We can imagine many ways to use list structure to represent algebraic
expressions.  For example, we could use lists of symbols that mirror the usual
algebraic notation, representing @math{{ax + b}} as the list @code{(a * x + b)}.  
However, one especially straightforward choice is to use the same
parenthesized prefix notation that Lisp uses for combinations; that is, to
represent @math{{ax + b}} as @code{(+ (* a x) b)}.  Then our data
representation for the differentiation problem is as follows:

@itemize @bullet

@item
The variables are symbols.  They are identified by the primitive predicate
@code{symbol?}:

@lisp
(define (variable? x) (symbol? x))
@end lisp

@item
Two variables are the same if the symbols representing them are @code{eq?}:

@lisp
(define (same-variable? v1 v2)
  (and (variable? v1)
       (variable? v2)
       (eq? v1 v2)))
@end lisp

@item
Sums and products are constructed as lists:

@lisp
(define (make-sum a1 a2) (list '+ a1 a2))
(define (make-product m1 m2) (list '* m1 m2))
@end lisp

@item
A sum is a list whose first element is the symbol @code{+}:

@lisp
(define (sum? x)
  (and (pair? x) (eq? (car x) '+)))
@end lisp

@item
The addend is the second item of the sum list:

@lisp
(define (addend s) (cadr s))
@end lisp

@item
The augend is the third item of the sum list:

@lisp
(define (augend s) (caddr s))
@end lisp

@item
A product is a list whose first element is the symbol @code{*}:
@lisp
(define (product? x)
  (and (pair? x) (eq? (car x) '*)))
@end lisp

@item
The multiplier is the second item of the product list:

@lisp
(define (multiplier p) (cadr p))
@end lisp

@item
The multiplicand is the third item of the product list:

@lisp
(define (multiplicand p) (caddr p))
@end lisp

@end itemize

@noindent
Thus, we need only combine these with the algorithm as embodied by @code{deriv}
in order to have a working symbolic-differentiation program.  Let us look at
some examples of its behavior:

@lisp
(deriv '(+ x 3) 'x)
@i{(+ 1 0)}

(deriv '(* x y) 'x)
@i{(+ (* x 0) (* 1 y))}

(deriv '(* (* x y) (+ x 3)) 'x)
@i{(+ (* (* x y) (+ 1 0))}
   @i{(* (+ (* x 0) (* 1 y))}
      @i{(+  x 3)))}
@end lisp

@noindent
The program produces answers that are correct; however, they are unsimplified.
It is true that
@ifinfo

@example
d(xy)
----- = x * 0 + 1 * y
 dx
@end example

@end ifinfo
@tex
\[ % :44:
  {d(xy) \over dx} \,=\, {x \cdot 0} + {1 \cdot y,}  \]
@end tex
@noindent
but we would like the program to know that @math{{x \cdot 0 = 0}}, @math{{1 \cdot y = y}},
and @math{{0 + y = y}}.  The answer for the second example should have been
simply @code{y}.  As the third example shows, this becomes a serious issue when
the expressions are complex.

Our difficulty is much like the one we encountered with the rational-number
implementation: we haven't reduced answers to simplest form.  To accomplish the
rational-number reduction, we needed to change only the constructors and the
selectors of the implementation.  We can adopt a similar strategy here.  We
won't change @code{deriv} at all.  Instead, we will change @code{make-sum} so
that if both summands are numbers, @code{make-sum} will add them and return
their sum.  Also, if one of the summands is 0, then @code{make-sum} will return
the other summand:

@lisp
(define (make-sum a1 a2)
  (cond ((=number? a1 0) a2)
        ((=number? a2 0) a1)
        ((and (number? a1) (number? a2)) 
         (+ a1 a2))
        (else (list '+ a1 a2))))
@end lisp

@noindent
This uses the procedure @code{=number?}, which checks whether an expression is
equal to a given number:

@lisp
(define (=number? exp num)
  (and (number? exp) (= exp num)))
@end lisp

@noindent
Similarly, we will change @code{make-product} to build in the rules that 0
times anything is 0 and 1 times anything is the thing itself:

@lisp
(define (make-product m1 m2)
  (cond ((or (=number? m1 0) 
             (=number? m2 0)) 
         0)
        ((=number? m1 1) m2)
        ((=number? m2 1) m1)
        ((and (number? m1) (number? m2)) 
         (* m1 m2))
        (else (list '* m1 m2))))
@end lisp

@noindent
Here is how this version works on our three examples:

@lisp
(deriv '(+ x 3) 'x)
@i{1}

(deriv '(* x y) 'x)
@i{y}

(deriv '(* (* x y) (+ x 3)) 'x)
@i{(+ (* x y) (* y (+ x 3)))}
@end lisp

@noindent
Although this is quite an improvement, the third example shows that there is
still a long way to go before we get a program that puts expressions into a
form that we might agree is ``simplest.''  The problem of algebraic
simplification is complex because, among other reasons, a form that may be
simplest for one purpose may not be for another.

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 2.56}Exercise 2.56:} Show how to extend the basic
differentiator to handle more kinds of expressions.  For instance, implement
the differentiation rule
@ifinfo

@example
d(u^n)            du
------ = nu^(n-1) --  
  dx              dx
@end example

@end ifinfo
@tex
\[ % :45:
  {d(u^{\kern0.1ex n}) \over dx} \,=\, {nu^{\kern0.1ex n-1} \, {du \over dx}}  \]
@end tex
@noindent
by adding a new clause to the @code{deriv} program and defining appropriate
procedures @code{exponentiation?}, @code{base}, @code{exponent}, and
@code{make-exponentiation}.  (You may use the symbol @code{**} to denote
exponentiation.)  Build in the rules that anything raised to the power 0 is 1
and anything raised to the power 1 is the thing itself.
@end quotation

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 2.57}Exercise 2.57:} Extend the differentiation
program to handle sums and products of arbitrary numbers of (two or more)
terms.  Then the last example above could be expressed as

@lisp
(deriv '(* x y (+ x 3)) 'x)
@end lisp

Try to do this by changing only the representation for sums and products,
without changing the @code{deriv} procedure at all.  For example, the
@code{addend} of a sum would be the first term, and the @code{augend} would be
the sum of the rest of the terms.
@end quotation

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 2.58}Exercise 2.58:} Suppose we want to modify the
differentiation program so that it works with ordinary mathematical notation,
in which @code{+} and @code{*} are infix rather than prefix operators.  Since
the differentiation program is defined in terms of abstract data, we can modify
it to work with different representations of expressions solely by changing the
predicates, selectors, and constructors that define the representation of the
algebraic expressions on which the differentiator is to operate.

@enumerate a

@item
Show how to do this in order to differentiate algebraic expressions presented
in infix form, such as @code{(x + (3 * (x + (y + 2))))}.  To simplify the task,
assume that @code{+} and @code{*} always take two arguments and that
expressions are fully parenthesized.

@item
The problem becomes substantially harder if we allow standard algebraic
notation, such as @code{(x + 3 * (x + y + 2))}, which drops unnecessary
parentheses and assumes that multiplication is done before addition.  Can you
design appropriate predicates, selectors, and constructors for this notation
such that our derivative program still works?

@end enumerate
@end quotation

