@node	5.2, 5.3, 5.1, Chapter 5
@section A Register-Machine Simulator

In order to gain a good understanding of the design of register machines, we
must test the machines we design to see if they perform as expected.  One way
to test a design is to hand-simulate the operation of the controller, as in
@ref{Exercise 5.5}.  But this is extremely tedious for all but the simplest
machines.  In this section we construct a simulator for machines described in
the register-machine language.  The simulator is a Scheme program with four
interface procedures.  The first uses a description of a register machine to
construct a model of the machine (a data structure whose parts correspond to
the parts of the machine to be simulated), and the other three allow us to
simulate the machine by manipulating the model:

@quotation

@lisp
(make-machine ⟨@var{register-names}⟩
              ⟨@var{operations}⟩
              ⟨@var{controller}⟩)
@end lisp

@noindent
constructs and returns a model of the machine with the given registers,
operations, and controller.

@lisp
(set-register-contents! ⟨@var{machine-model}⟩ 
                        ⟨@var{register-name}⟩ 
                        ⟨@var{value}⟩)
@end lisp

@noindent
stores a value in a simulated register in the given machine.

@lisp
(get-register-contents ⟨@var{machine-model}⟩
                       ⟨@var{register-name}⟩)
@end lisp

@noindent
returns the contents of a simulated register in the given machine.

@lisp
(start ⟨@var{machine-model}⟩)
@end lisp

@noindent
simulates the execution of the given machine, starting from the beginning of
the controller sequence and stopping when it reaches the end of the sequence.
@end quotation

@noindent
As an example of how these procedures are used, we can define
@code{gcd-machine} to be a model of the @abbr{GCD} machine of 
@ref{5.1.1} as follows:

@lisp
(define gcd-machine
  (make-machine
   '(a b t)
   (list (list 'rem remainder) (list '= =))
   '(test-b
       (test (op =) (reg b) (const 0))
       (branch (label gcd-done))
       (assign t (op rem) (reg a) (reg b))
       (assign a (reg b))
       (assign b (reg t))
       (goto (label test-b))
     gcd-done)))
@end lisp

@noindent
The first argument to @code{make-machine} is a list of register names.  The
next argument is a table (a list of two-element lists) that pairs each
operation name with a Scheme procedure that implements the operation (that is,
produces the same output value given the same input values).  The last argument
specifies the controller as a list of labels and machine instructions, as in
@ref{5.1}.

To compute @abbr{GCD}s with this machine, we set the input registers, start
the machine, and examine the result when the simulation terminates:

@lisp
(set-register-contents! gcd-machine 'a 206)
@i{done}

(set-register-contents! gcd-machine 'b 40)
@i{done}

(start gcd-machine)
@i{done}

(get-register-contents gcd-machine 'a)
@i{2}
@end lisp

@noindent
This computation will run much more slowly than a @code{gcd} procedure written
in Scheme, because we will simulate low-level machine instructions, such as
@code{assign}, by much more complex operations.

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 5.7}Exercise 5.7:} Use the simulator to test the
machines you designed in @ref{Exercise 5.4}.
@end quotation

@menu
* 5.2.1::            The Machine Model
* 5.2.2::            The Assembler
* 5.2.3::            Generating Execution Procedures for Instructions
* 5.2.4::            Monitoring Machine Performance
@end menu

@include ss01.texi
@include ss02.texi
@include ss03.texi
@include ss04.texi
