@node	4.3, 4.4, 4.2, Chapter 4
@section Variations on a Scheme --- Nondeterministic Computing

In this section, we extend the Scheme evaluator to support a programming
paradigm called @newterm{nondeterministic computing} by building into the
evaluator a facility to support automatic search.  This is a much more profound
change to the language than the introduction of lazy evaluation in 
@ref{4.2}.

Nondeterministic computing, like stream processing, is useful for ``generate
and test'' applications.  Consider the task of starting with two lists of
positive integers and finding a pair of integers---one from the first list and
one from the second list---whose sum is prime.  We saw how to handle this with
finite sequence operations in @ref{2.2.3} and with infinite streams in
@ref{3.5.3}.  Our approach was to generate the sequence of all possible
pairs and filter these to select the pairs whose sum is prime.  Whether we
actually generate the entire sequence of pairs first as in @ref{Chapter 2}, or
interleave the generating and filtering as in @ref{Chapter 3}, is immaterial to
the essential image of how the computation is organized.

The nondeterministic approach evokes a different image.  Imagine simply that we
choose (in some way) a number from the first list and a number from the second
list and require (using some mechanism) that their sum be prime.  This is
expressed by following procedure:

@lisp
(define (prime-sum-pair list1 list2)
  (let ((a (an-element-of list1))
        (b (an-element-of list2)))
    (require (prime? (+ a b)))
    (list a b)))
@end lisp

@noindent
It might seem as if this procedure merely restates the problem, rather than
specifying a way to solve it.  Nevertheless, this is a legitimate
nondeterministic program.@footnote{We assume that we have previously defined a
procedure @code{prime?} that tests whether numbers are prime.  Even with
@code{prime?} defined, the @code{prime-sum-pair} procedure may look
suspiciously like the unhelpful ``pseudo-Lisp'' attempt to define the
square-root function, which we described at the beginning of 
@ref{1.1.7}.  In fact, a square-root procedure along those lines can actually
be formulated as a nondeterministic program.  By incorporating a search
mechanism into the evaluator, we are eroding the distinction between purely
declarative descriptions and imperative specifications of how to compute
answers.  We'll go even farther in this direction in @ref{4.4}.}

The key idea here is that expressions in a nondeterministic language can have
more than one possible value.  For instance, @code{an-element-of} might return
any element of the given list.  Our nondeterministic program evaluator will
work by automatically choosing a possible value and keeping track of the
choice.  If a subsequent requirement is not met, the evaluator will try a
different choice, and it will keep trying new choices until the evaluation
succeeds, or until we run out of choices.  Just as the lazy evaluator freed the
programmer from the details of how values are delayed and forced, the
nondeterministic program evaluator will free the programmer from the details of
how choices are made.

It is instructive to contrast the different images of time evoked by
nondeterministic evaluation and stream processing.  Stream processing uses lazy
evaluation to decouple the time when the stream of possible answers is
assembled from the time when the actual stream elements are produced.  The
evaluator supports the illusion that all the possible answers are laid out
before us in a timeless sequence.  With nondeterministic evaluation, an
expression represents the exploration of a set of possible worlds, each
determined by a set of choices.  Some of the possible worlds lead to dead ends,
while others have useful values.  The nondeterministic program evaluator
supports the illusion that time branches, and that our programs have different
possible execution histories.  When we reach a dead end, we can revisit a
previous choice point and proceed along a different branch.

The nondeterministic program evaluator implemented below is called the
@code{amb} evaluator because it is based on a new special form called
@code{amb}.  We can type the above definition of @code{prime-sum-pair} at the
@code{amb} evaluator driver loop (along with definitions of @code{prime?},
@code{an-element-of}, and @code{require}) and run the procedure as follows:

@lisp
@i{;;; Amb-Eval input:}
(prime-sum-pair '(1 3 5 8) '(20 35 110))

@i{;;; Starting a new problem}
@i{;;; Amb-Eval value:}
@i{(3 20)}
@end lisp

@noindent
The value returned was obtained after the evaluator repeatedly chose elements
from each of the lists, until a successful choice was made.

Section @ref{4.3.1} introduces @code{amb} and explains how it supports
nondeterminism through the evaluator's automatic search mechanism.  
@ref{4.3.2} presents examples of nondeterministic programs, and 
@ref{4.3.3} gives the details of how to implement the @code{amb} evaluator by
modifying the ordinary Scheme evaluator.

@menu
* 4.3.1::            Amb and Search
* 4.3.2::            Examples of Nondeterministic Programs
* 4.3.3::            Implementing the @code{Amb} Evaluator
@end menu

@include ss01.texi
@include ss02.texi
@include ss03.texi
