@node	3.3, 3.4, 3.2, Chapter 3
@section Modeling with Mutable Data

@ref{Chapter 2} dealt with compound data as a means for constructing computational
objects that have several parts, in order to model real-world objects that have
several aspects.  In that chapter we introduced the discipline of data
abstraction, according to which data structures are specified in terms of
constructors, which create data objects, and selectors, which access the parts
of compound data objects.  But we now know that there is another aspect of data
that chapter 2 did not address.  The desire to model systems composed of
objects that have changing state leads us to the need to modify compound data
objects, as well as to construct and select from them.  In order to model
compound objects with changing state, we will design data abstractions to
include, in addition to selectors and constructors, operations called
@newterm{mutators}, which modify data objects.  For instance, modeling a
banking system requires us to change account balances.  Thus, a data structure
for representing bank accounts might admit an operation

@lisp
(set-balance! ⟨@var{account}⟩ ⟨@var{new-value}⟩)
@end lisp

@noindent
that changes the balance of the designated account to the designated new value.
Data objects for which mutators are defined are known as @newterm{mutable data objects}.

Chapter 2 introduced pairs as a general-purpose ``glue'' for synthesizing
compound data.  We begin this section by defining basic mutators for pairs, so
that pairs can serve as building blocks for constructing mutable data objects.
These mutators greatly enhance the representational power of pairs, enabling us
to build data structures other than the sequences and trees that we worked with
in @ref{2.2}.  We also present some examples of simulations in which
complex systems are modeled as collections of objects with local state.

@menu
* 3.3.1::            Mutable List Structure
* 3.3.2::            Representing Queues
* 3.3.3::            Representing Tables
* 3.3.4::            A Simulator for Digital Circuits
* 3.3.5::            Propagation of Constraints
@end menu

@include ss01.texi
@include ss02.texi
@include ss03.texi
@include ss04.texi
@include ss05.texi
