@node	1.2.5, 1.2.6, 1.2.4, 1.2
@subsection Greatest Common Divisors

The greatest common divisor (@abbr{GCD}) of two integers @math{a} and @math{b} is
defined to be the largest integer that divides both @math{a} and @math{b} with no
remainder.  For example, the @abbr{GCD} of 16 and 28 is 4.  In @ref{Chapter
2}, when we investigate how to implement rational-number arithmetic, we will
need to be able to compute @abbr{GCD}s in order to reduce rational numbers
to lowest terms.  (To reduce a rational number to lowest terms, we must divide
both the numerator and the denominator by their @abbr{GCD}.  For example,
16/28 reduces to 4/7.)  One way to find the @abbr{GCD} of two integers is to
factor them and search for common factors, but there is a famous algorithm that
is much more efficient.

The idea of the algorithm is based on the observation that, if @math{r} is the
remainder when @math{a} is divided by @math{b}, then the common divisors of @math{a} and
@math{b} are precisely the same as the common divisors of @math{b} and @math{r}.  Thus,
we can use the equation

@example
GCD(a,b) = GCD(b,r)
@end example

@noindent
to successively reduce the problem of computing a @abbr{GCD} to the problem
of computing the @abbr{GCD} of smaller and smaller pairs of integers.  For
example,

@example
GCD(206,40) = GCD(40,6)
            = GCD(6,4)
            = GCD(4,2)
            = GCD(2,0) = 2
@end example

@noindent
reduces @abbr{GCD}(206, 40) to @abbr{GCD}(2, 0), which is 2.  It is
possible to show that starting with any two positive integers and performing
repeated reductions will always eventually produce a pair where the second
number is 0.  Then the @abbr{GCD} is the other number in the pair.  This
method for computing the @abbr{GCD} is known as 
@newterm{Euclid's Algorithm}.@footnote{Euclid's Algorithm is so called because 
it appears in Euclid's @cite{Elements} (Book 7, ca. 300 @abbr{B.C.}).  
According to @ref{Knuth (1973)}, it can be considered the oldest known nontrivial 
algorithm.  The ancient Egyptian method of multiplication (@ref{Exercise 1.18}) is 
surely older, but, as Knuth explains, Euclid's algorithm is the oldest known to 
have been presented as a general algorithm, rather than as a set of illustrative
examples.}

It is easy to express Euclid's Algorithm as a procedure:

@lisp
(define (gcd a b)
  (if (= b 0)
      a
      (gcd b (remainder a b))))
@end lisp

@noindent
This generates an iterative process, whose number of steps grows as the
logarithm of the numbers involved.

The fact that the number of steps required by Euclid's Algorithm has
logarithmic growth bears an interesting relation to the Fibonacci numbers:

@quotation
@strong{Lam@'e's Theorem:} If Euclid's Algorithm requires @math{k} steps to
compute the @abbr{GCD} of some pair, then the smaller number in the pair
must be greater than or equal to the @math{k^{\text{th}}} Fibonacci number.@footnote{This
theorem was proved in 1845 by Gabriel Lam@'e, a French mathematician and
engineer known chiefly for his contributions to mathematical physics.  To prove
the theorem, we consider pairs @math{{(a_k, b_k)}}, where @math{{a_k \ge b_k}}, 
for which Euclid's Algorithm terminates in @math{k} steps.  The proof
is based on the claim that, if @math{{(a_{k+1}, b_{k+1})} \to {(a_k, b_k)} \to {(a_{k-1}, b_{k-1})}} 
are three successive pairs 
in the reduction process, then we must have @math{b_{k+1} \ge b_k + b_{k-1}}.  
To verify the claim, consider that a reduction step is defined by applying the 
transformation @math{{a_{k-1} = b_k}}, @math{{b_{k-1} =}} remainder of @math{a_k} 
divided by @math{b_k}.  The second equation means that @math{a_k = {qb_k} + {b_{k-1}}} 
for some positive integer @math{q}.  And since @math{q} must be at least 1 we have 
@math{a_k = {qb_k} + b_{k-1} \ge b_k + b_{k-1}}.  But in the previous reduction 
step we have @math{b_{k+1} = a_k}.  Therefore, @math{b_{k+1} = a_k \ge b_k + b_{k-1}}.
This verifies the claim.  Now we can prove the theorem by induction on @math{k}, 
the number of steps that the algorithm requires to terminate.  The result is true for 
@math{{k = 1}}, since this merely requires that @math{b} be at least as large as @math{{\text{Fib}(1) = 1}}.  
Now, assume that the result is true for all integers less than or equal
to @math{k} and establish the result for @math{{k + 1}}.  
Let @math{{(a_{k+1}, b_{k+1})} \to {(a_k, b_k)} \to {(a_{k-1}, b_{k-1})}} 
be successive pairs in the reduction 
process.  By our induction hypotheses, we have @math{b_{k-1} \ge {\text{Fib}(k - 1)}} 
and @math{b_k \ge {\text{Fib}(k)}}.  Thus, applying the claim we just proved together with 
the definition of the Fibonacci numbers gives 
@math{b_{k+1} \ge b_k + b_{k-1} \ge {\text{Fib}(k)} + {\text{Fib}(k-1)} = {\text{Fib}(k+1)}}, 
which completes the proof of Lam@'e's Theorem.}
@end quotation

@noindent
We can use this theorem to get an order-of-growth estimate for Euclid's
Algorithm.  Let @math{n} be the smaller of the two inputs to the procedure.  If
the process takes @math{k} steps, then we must have 
@math{n \ge {\text{Fib}(k)} \approx {\varphi^k / \sqrt{5}}}.  Therefore the number of steps @math{k}
grows as the logarithm (to the base @math{\varphi}) of @math{n}.  Hence, the order of
growth is @math{{\Theta(\log n)}}.

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 1.20}Exercise 1.20:} The process that a procedure
generates is of course dependent on the rules used by the interpreter.  As an
example, consider the iterative @code{gcd} procedure given above.  Suppose we
were to interpret this procedure using normal-order evaluation, as discussed in
@ref{1.1.5}.  (The normal-order-evaluation rule for @code{if} is
described in @ref{Exercise 1.5}.)  Using the substitution method (for normal
order), illustrate the process generated in evaluating @code{(gcd 206 40)} and
indicate the @code{remainder} operations that are actually performed.  How many
@code{remainder} operations are actually performed in the normal-order
evaluation of @code{(gcd 206 40)}?  In the applicative-order evaluation?
@end quotation

