@node	3.1.1, 3.1.2, 3.1, 3.1
@subsection Local State Variables

To illustrate what we mean by having a computational object with time-varying
state, let us model the situation of withdrawing money from a bank account.  We
will do this using a procedure @code{withdraw}, which takes as argument an
@code{amount} to be withdrawn.  If there is enough money in the account to
accommodate the withdrawal, then @code{withdraw} should return the balance
remaining after the withdrawal.  Otherwise, @code{withdraw} should return the
message @emph{Insufficient funds}. For example, if we begin with $100 in the
account, we should obtain the following sequence of responses using
@code{withdraw}:

@lisp
(withdraw 25)
@i{75}

(withdraw 25)
@i{50}

(withdraw 60)
@i{"Insufficient funds"}

(withdraw 15)
@i{35}
@end lisp

@noindent
Observe that the expression @code{(withdraw 25)}, evaluated twice, yields
different values.  This is a new kind of behavior for a procedure.  Until now,
all our procedures could be viewed as specifications for computing mathematical
functions.  A call to a procedure computed the value of the function applied to
the given arguments, and two calls to the same procedure with the same
arguments always produced the same result.@footnote{Actually, this is not quite
true.  One exception was the random-number generator in @ref{1.2.6}.
Another exception involved the operation/type tables we introduced in 
@ref{2.4.3}, where the values of two calls to @code{get} with the same
arguments depended on intervening calls to @code{put}.  On the other hand,
until we introduce assignment, we have no way to create such procedures
ourselves.}

To implement @code{withdraw}, we can use a variable @code{balance} to indicate
the balance of money in the account and define @code{withdraw} as a procedure
that accesses @code{balance}.  The @code{withdraw} procedure checks to see if
@code{balance} is at least as large as the requested @code{amount}.  If so,
@code{withdraw} decrements @code{balance} by @code{amount} and returns the new
value of @code{balance}.  Otherwise, @code{withdraw} returns the
@emph{Insufficient funds} message.  Here are the definitions of @code{balance}
and @code{withdraw}:

@lisp
(define balance 100)

(define (withdraw amount)
  (if (>= balance amount)
      (begin (set! balance (- balance amount))
             balance)
      "Insufficient funds"))
@end lisp

@noindent
Decrementing @code{balance} is accomplished by the expression

@lisp
(set! balance (- balance amount))
@end lisp

@noindent
This uses the @code{set!} special form, whose syntax is

@lisp
(set! ⟨@var{name}⟩ ⟨@var{new-value}⟩)
@end lisp

@noindent
Here @code{⟨}@var{name}@code{⟩} is a symbol and @code{⟨}@var{new-value}@code{⟩} is any expression.
@code{Set!} changes @code{⟨}@var{name}@code{⟩} so that its value is the result obtained by
evaluating @code{⟨}@var{new-value}@code{⟩}.  In the case at hand, we are changing
@code{balance} so that its new value will be the result of subtracting
@code{amount} from the previous value of @code{balance}.@footnote{The value of
a @code{set!} expression is implementation-dependent.  @code{Set!} should be
used only for its effect, not for its value.

The name @code{set!} reflects a naming convention used in Scheme: Operations
that change the values of variables (or that change data structures, as we will
see in @ref{3.3}) are given names that end with an exclamation point.
This is similar to the convention of designating predicates by names that end
with a question mark.}

@code{Withdraw} also uses the @code{begin} special form to cause two
expressions to be evaluated in the case where the @code{if} test is true: first
decrementing @code{balance} and then returning the value of @code{balance}.  In
general, evaluating the expression

@lisp
(begin ⟨@var{exp₁}⟩ ⟨@var{exp₂}⟩ @r{…} ⟨@var{expₖ}⟩)
@end lisp

@noindent
causes the expressions @math{{⟨exp_1⟩}} through @math{{⟨exp_k⟩}} to be evaluated
in sequence and the value of the final expression @math{{⟨exp_k⟩}} to be
returned as the value of the entire @code{begin} form.@footnote{We have already
used @code{begin} implicitly in our programs, because in Scheme the body of a
procedure can be a sequence of expressions.  Also, the @code{⟨}@var{consequent}@code{⟩} part
of each clause in a @code{cond} expression can be a sequence of expressions
rather than a single expression.}

Although @code{withdraw} works as desired, the variable @code{balance} presents
a problem.  As specified above, @code{balance} is a name defined in the global
environment and is freely accessible to be examined or modified by any
procedure.  It would be much better if we could somehow make @code{balance}
internal to @code{withdraw}, so that @code{withdraw} would be the only
procedure that could access @code{balance} directly and any other procedure
could access @code{balance} only indirectly (through calls to @code{withdraw}).
This would more accurately model the notion that @code{balance} is a local
state variable used by @code{withdraw} to keep track of the state of the
account.

We can make @code{balance} internal to @code{withdraw} by rewriting the
definition as follows:

@lisp
(define new-withdraw
  (let ((balance 100))
    (lambda (amount)
      (if (>= balance amount)
          (begin (set! balance 
                       (- balance amount))
                 balance)
          "Insufficient funds"))))
@end lisp

@noindent
What we have done here is use @code{let} to establish an environment with a
local variable @code{balance}, bound to the initial value 100.  Within this
local environment, we use @code{lambda} to create a procedure that takes
@code{amount} as an argument and behaves like our previous @code{withdraw}
procedure.  This procedure---returned as the result of evaluating the
@code{let} expression---is @code{new-withdraw}, which behaves in precisely the
same way as @code{withdraw} but whose variable @code{balance} is not accessible
by any other procedure.@footnote{In programming-language jargon, the variable
@code{balance} is said to be @newterm{encapsulated} within the
@code{new-withdraw} procedure.  Encapsulation reflects the general
system-design principle known as the @newterm{hiding principle}: One can make a
system more modular and robust by protecting parts of the system from each
other; that is, by providing information access only to those parts of the
system that have a ``need to know.''}

Combining @code{set!} with local variables is the general programming technique
we will use for constructing computational objects with local state.
Unfortunately, using this technique raises a serious problem: When we first
introduced procedures, we also introduced the substitution model of evaluation
(@ref{1.1.5}) to provide an interpretation of what procedure
application means.  We said that applying a procedure should be interpreted as
evaluating the body of the procedure with the formal parameters replaced by
their values.  The trouble is that, as soon as we introduce assignment into our
language, substitution is no longer an adequate model of procedure application.
(We will see why this is so in @ref{3.1.3}.)  As a consequence, we
technically have at this point no way to understand why the @code{new-withdraw}
procedure behaves as claimed above.  In order to really understand a procedure
such as @code{new-withdraw}, we will need to develop a new model of procedure
application.  In @ref{3.2} we will introduce such a model, together
with an explanation of @code{set!} and local variables.  First, however, we
examine some variations on the theme established by @code{new-withdraw}.

The following procedure, @code{make-withdraw}, creates ``withdrawal
processors.''  The formal parameter @code{balance} in @code{make-withdraw}
specifies the initial amount of money in the account.@footnote{In contrast with
@code{new-withdraw} above, we do not have to use @code{let} to make
@code{balance} a local variable, since formal parameters are already local.
This will be clearer after the discussion of the environment model of
evaluation in @ref{3.2}.  (See also @ref{Exercise 3.10}.)}

@lisp
(define (make-withdraw balance)
  (lambda (amount)
    (if (>= balance amount)
        (begin (set! balance 
                     (- balance amount))
               balance)
        "Insufficient funds")))
@end lisp

@noindent
@code{Make-withdraw} can be used as follows to create two objects @code{W1} and
@code{W2}:

@lisp
(define W1 (make-withdraw 100))
(define W2 (make-withdraw 100))

(W1 50)
@i{50}

(W2 70)
@i{30}

(W2 40)
@i{"Insufficient funds"}

(W1 40)
@i{10}
@end lisp

@noindent
Observe that @code{W1} and @code{W2} are completely independent objects, each
with its own local state variable @code{balance}.  Withdrawals from one do not
affect the other.

We can also create objects that handle deposits as well as withdrawals, and
thus we can represent simple bank accounts.  Here is a procedure that returns a
``bank-account object'' with a specified initial balance:

@lisp
(define (make-account balance)
  (define (withdraw amount)
    (if (>= balance amount)
        (begin (set! balance 
                     (- balance amount))
               balance)
        "Insufficient funds"))
  (define (deposit amount)
    (set! balance (+ balance amount))
    balance)
  (define (dispatch m)
    (cond ((eq? m 'withdraw) withdraw)
          ((eq? m 'deposit) deposit)
          (else (error "Unknown request: 
                 MAKE-ACCOUNT" m))))
  dispatch)
@end lisp

@noindent
Each call to @code{make-account} sets up an environment with a local state
variable @code{balance}.  Within this environment, @code{make-account} defines
procedures @code{deposit} and @code{withdraw} that access @code{balance} and an
additional procedure @code{dispatch} that takes a ``message'' as input and
returns one of the two local procedures.  The @code{dispatch} procedure itself
is returned as the value that represents the bank-account object.  This is
precisely the @newterm{message-passing} style of programming that we saw in
@ref{2.4.3}, although here we are using it in conjunction with the
ability to modify local variables.

@code{Make-account} can be used as follows:

@lisp
(define acc (make-account 100))

((acc 'withdraw) 50)
@i{50}

((acc 'withdraw) 60)
@i{"Insufficient funds"}

((acc 'deposit) 40)
@i{90}

((acc 'withdraw) 60)
@i{30}
@end lisp

@noindent
Each call to @code{acc} returns the locally defined @code{deposit} or
@code{withdraw} procedure, which is then applied to the specified
@code{amount}.  As was the case with @code{make-withdraw}, another call to
@code{make-account}

@lisp
(define acc2 (make-account 100))
@end lisp

@noindent
will produce a completely separate account object, which maintains its own
local @code{balance}.

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 3.1}Exercise 3.1:} An @newterm{accumulator} is a
procedure that is called repeatedly with a single numeric argument and
accumulates its arguments into a sum.  Each time it is called, it returns the
currently accumulated sum.  Write a procedure @code{make-accumulator} that
generates accumulators, each maintaining an independent sum.  The input to
@code{make-accumulator} should specify the initial value of the sum; for
example

@lisp
(define A (make-accumulator 5))

(A 10)
@i{15}

(A 10)
@i{25}
@end lisp
@end quotation

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 3.2}Exercise 3.2:} In software-testing applications,
it is useful to be able to count the number of times a given procedure is
called during the course of a computation.  Write a procedure
@code{make-monitored} that takes as input a procedure, @code{f}, that itself
takes one input.  The result returned by @code{make-monitored} is a third
procedure, say @code{mf}, that keeps track of the number of times it has been
called by maintaining an internal counter.  If the input to @code{mf} is the
special symbol @code{how-many-calls?}, then @code{mf} returns the value of the
counter.  If the input is the special symbol @code{reset-count}, then @code{mf}
resets the counter to zero.  For any other input, @code{mf} returns the result
of calling @code{f} on that input and increments the counter.  For instance, we
could make a monitored version of the @code{sqrt} procedure:

@lisp
(define s (make-monitored sqrt))

(s 100)
@i{10}

(s 'how-many-calls?)
@i{1}
@end lisp
@end quotation

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 3.3}Exercise 3.3:} Modify the @code{make-account}
procedure so that it creates password-protected accounts.  That is,
@code{make-account} should take a symbol as an additional argument, as in

@lisp
(define acc 
  (make-account 100 'secret-password))
@end lisp

The resulting account object should process a request only if it is accompanied
by the password with which the account was created, and should otherwise return
a complaint:

@lisp
((acc 'secret-password 'withdraw) 40)
@i{60}

((acc 'some-other-password 'deposit) 50)
@i{"Incorrect password"}
@end lisp
@end quotation

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 3.4}Exercise 3.4:} Modify the @code{make-account}
procedure of @ref{Exercise 3.3} by adding another local state variable so that,
if an account is accessed more than seven consecutive times with an incorrect
password, it invokes the procedure @code{call-the-cops}.
@end quotation

