@node	4.1.1, 4.1.2, 4.1, 4.1
@subsection The Core of the Evaluator

The evaluation process can be described as the interplay between two
procedures: @code{eval} and @code{apply}.

@subsubheading Eval

@code{Eval} takes as arguments an expression and an environment.  It classifies
the expression and directs its evaluation.  @code{Eval} is structured as a case
analysis of the syntactic type of the expression to be evaluated.  In order to
keep the procedure general, we express the determination of the type of an
expression abstractly, making no commitment to any particular representation
for the various types of expressions.  Each type of expression has a predicate
that tests for it and an abstract means for selecting its parts.  This
@newterm{abstract syntax} makes it easy to see how we can change the syntax of
the language by using the same evaluator, but with a different collection of
syntax procedures.

@noindent
@b{Primitive expressions}

@itemize @bullet

@item
For self-evaluating expressions, such as numbers, @code{eval} returns the
expression itself.

@item
@code{Eval} must look up variables in the environment to find their values.

@end itemize

@noindent
@b{Special forms}

@itemize @bullet

@item
For quoted expressions, @code{eval} returns the expression that was quoted.

@item
An assignment to (or a definition of) a variable must recursively call
@code{eval} to compute the new value to be associated with the variable.  The
environment must be modified to change (or create) the binding of the variable.

@item
An @code{if} expression requires special processing of its parts, so as to
evaluate the consequent if the predicate is true, and otherwise to evaluate the
alternative.

@item
A @code{lambda} expression must be transformed into an applicable procedure by
packaging together the parameters and body specified by the @code{lambda}
expression with the environment of the evaluation.

@item
A @code{begin} expression requires evaluating its sequence of expressions in
the order in which they appear.

@item
A case analysis (@code{cond}) is transformed into a nest of @code{if}
expressions and then evaluated.

@end itemize

@noindent
@b{Combinations}

@itemize @bullet

@item
For a procedure application, @code{eval} must recursively evaluate the operator
part and the operands of the combination.  The resulting procedure and
arguments are passed to @code{apply}, which handles the actual procedure
application.

@end itemize

@noindent
Here is the definition of @code{eval}:

@lisp
(define (eval exp env)
  (cond ((self-evaluating? exp) 
         exp)
        ((variable? exp) 
         (lookup-variable-value exp env))
        ((quoted? exp) 
         (text-of-quotation exp))
        ((assignment? exp) 
         (eval-assignment exp env))
        ((definition? exp) 
         (eval-definition exp env))
        ((if? exp) 
         (eval-if exp env))
        ((lambda? exp)
         (make-procedure 
          (lambda-parameters exp)
          (lambda-body exp)
          env))
        ((begin? exp)
         (eval-sequence 
          (begin-actions exp) 
          env))
        ((cond? exp) 
         (eval (cond->if exp) env))
        ((application? exp)
         (apply (eval (operator exp) env)
                (list-of-values 
                 (operands exp) 
                 env)))
        (else
         (error "Unknown expression 
                 type: EVAL" exp))))
@end lisp

@noindent
For clarity, @code{eval} has been implemented as a case analysis using
@code{cond}.  The disadvantage of this is that our procedure handles only a few
distinguishable types of expressions, and no new ones can be defined without
editing the definition of @code{eval}.  In most Lisp implementations,
dispatching on the type of an expression is done in a data-directed style.
This allows a user to add new types of expressions that @code{eval} can
distinguish, without modifying the definition of @code{eval} itself.  (See
@ref{Exercise 4.3}.)

@subsubheading Apply

@code{Apply} takes two arguments, a procedure and a list of arguments to which
the procedure should be applied.  @code{Apply} classifies procedures into two
kinds: It calls @code{apply-primitive-procedure} to apply primitives; it
applies compound procedures by sequentially evaluating the expressions that
make up the body of the procedure.  The environment for the evaluation of the
body of a compound procedure is constructed by extending the base environment
carried by the procedure to include a frame that binds the parameters of the
procedure to the arguments to which the procedure is to be applied.  Here is
the definition of @code{apply}:

@lisp
(define (apply procedure arguments)
  (cond ((primitive-procedure? procedure)
         (apply-primitive-procedure 
          procedure 
          arguments))
        ((compound-procedure? procedure)
         (eval-sequence
           (procedure-body procedure)
           (extend-environment
             (procedure-parameters 
              procedure)
             arguments
             (procedure-environment 
              procedure))))
        (else
         (error "Unknown procedure 
                 type: APPLY" 
                procedure))))
@end lisp

@subsubheading Procedure arguments

When @code{eval} processes a procedure application, it uses
@code{list-of-values} to produce the list of arguments to which the procedure
is to be applied. @code{List-of-values} takes as an argument the operands of
the combination.  It evaluates each operand and returns a list of the
corresponding values:@footnote{We could have simplified the @code{application?}
clause in @code{eval} by using @code{map} (and stipulating that @code{operands}
returns a list) rather than writing an explicit @code{list-of-values}
procedure.  We chose not to use @code{map} here to emphasize the fact that the
evaluator can be implemented without any use of higher-order procedures (and
thus could be written in a language that doesn't have higher-order procedures),
even though the language that it supports will include higher-order
procedures.}

@lisp
(define (list-of-values exps env)
  (if (no-operands? exps)
      '()
      (cons (eval (first-operand exps) env)
            (list-of-values 
             (rest-operands exps) 
             env))))
@end lisp

@subsubheading Conditionals

@code{Eval-if} evaluates the predicate part of an @code{if} expression in the
given environment.  If the result is true, @code{eval-if} evaluates the
consequent, otherwise it evaluates the alternative:

@lisp
(define (eval-if exp env)
  (if (true? (eval (if-predicate exp) env))
      (eval (if-consequent exp) env)
      (eval (if-alternative exp) env)))
@end lisp

@noindent
The use of @code{true?} in @code{eval-if} highlights the issue of the
connection between an implemented language and an implementation language.  The
@code{if-predicate} is evaluated in the language being implemented and thus
yields a value in that language.  The interpreter predicate @code{true?}
translates that value into a value that can be tested by the @code{if} in the
implementation language: The metacircular representation of truth might not be
the same as that of the underlying Scheme.@footnote{In this case, the language
being implemented and the implementation language are the same.  Contemplation
of the meaning of @code{true?} here yields expansion of consciousness without
the abuse of substance.}

@subsubheading Sequences

@code{Eval-sequence} is used by @code{apply} to evaluate the sequence of
expressions in a procedure body and by @code{eval} to evaluate the sequence of
expressions in a @code{begin} expression.  It takes as arguments a sequence of
expressions and an environment, and evaluates the expressions in the order in
which they occur.  The value returned is the value of the final expression.

@lisp
(define (eval-sequence exps env)
  (cond ((last-exp? exps) 
         (eval (first-exp exps) env))
        (else 
         (eval (first-exp exps) env)
         (eval-sequence (rest-exps exps) 
                        env))))
@end lisp

@subsubheading Assignments and definitions

The following procedure handles assignments to variables.  It calls @code{eval}
to find the value to be assigned and transmits the variable and the resulting
value to @code{set-variable-value!} to be installed in the designated
environment.

@lisp
(define (eval-assignment exp env)
  (set-variable-value! 
   (assignment-variable exp)
   (eval (assignment-value exp) env)
   env)
  'ok)
@end lisp

@noindent
Definitions of variables are handled in a similar manner.@footnote{This
implementation of @code{define} ignores a subtle issue in the handling of
internal definitions, although it works correctly in most cases.  We will see
what the problem is and how to solve it in @ref{4.1.6}.}

@lisp
(define (eval-definition exp env)
  (define-variable! 
    (definition-variable exp)
    (eval (definition-value exp) env)
    env)
  'ok)
@end lisp

@noindent
We have chosen here to return the symbol @code{ok} as the value of an
assignment or a definition.@footnote{As we said when we introduced
@code{define} and @code{set!}, these values are implementation-dependent in
Scheme---that is, the implementor can choose what value to return.}

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 4.1}Exercise 4.1:} Notice that we cannot tell whether
the metacircular evaluator evaluates operands from left to right or from right
to left.  Its evaluation order is inherited from the underlying Lisp: If the
arguments to @code{cons} in @code{list-of-values} are evaluated from left to
right, then @code{list-of-values} will evaluate operands from left to right;
and if the arguments to @code{cons} are evaluated from right to left, then
@code{list-of-values} will evaluate operands from right to left.

Write a version of @code{list-of-values} that evaluates operands from left to
right regardless of the order of evaluation in the underlying Lisp.  Also write
a version of @code{list-of-values} that evaluates operands from right to left.
@end quotation

