@node	4.1.2, 4.1.3, 4.1.1, 4.1
@subsection Representing Expressions

The evaluator is reminiscent of the symbolic differentiation program discussed
in @ref{2.3.2}.  Both programs operate on symbolic expressions.  In
both programs, the result of operating on a compound expression is determined
by operating recursively on the pieces of the expression and combining the
results in a way that depends on the type of the expression.  In both programs
we used data abstraction to decouple the general rules of operation from the
details of how expressions are represented.  In the differentiation program
this meant that the same differentiation procedure could deal with algebraic
expressions in prefix form, in infix form, or in some other form.  For the
evaluator, this means that the syntax of the language being evaluated is
determined solely by the procedures that classify and extract pieces of
expressions.

Here is the specification of the syntax of our language:

@itemize

@item
The only self-evaluating items are numbers and strings:

@lisp
(define (self-evaluating? exp)
  (cond ((number? exp) true)
        ((string? exp) true)
        (else false)))
@end lisp

@item
Variables are represented by symbols:

@lisp
(define (variable? exp) (symbol? exp))
@end lisp

@item
Quotations have the form @code{(quote ⟨@var{text-of-quotation}⟩)}:@footnote{As
mentioned in @ref{2.3.1}, the evaluator sees a quoted expression as a
list beginning with @code{quote}, even if the expression is typed with the
quotation mark.  For example, the expression @code{'a} would be seen by the
evaluator as @code{(quote a)}.  See @ref{Exercise 2.55}.}

@lisp
(define (quoted? exp)
  (tagged-list? exp 'quote))

(define (text-of-quotation exp)
  (cadr exp))
@end lisp

@code{Quoted?} is defined in terms of the procedure @code{tagged-list?}, which
identifies lists beginning with a designated symbol:

@lisp
(define (tagged-list? exp tag)
  (if (pair? exp)
      (eq? (car exp) tag)
      false))
@end lisp

@item
Assignments have the form @code{(set! ⟨@var{var}⟩ ⟨@var{value}⟩)}:

@lisp
(define (assignment? exp)
  (tagged-list? exp 'set!))

(define (assignment-variable exp) 
  (cadr exp))

(define (assignment-value exp) (caddr exp))
@end lisp

@item
Definitions have the form

@lisp
(define ⟨@var{var}⟩ ⟨@var{value}⟩)
@end lisp

@noindent
or the form

@lisp
(define (⟨@var{var}⟩ ⟨@var{param₁}⟩ @r{…} ⟨@var{paramₙ}⟩)
  ⟨@var{body}⟩)
@end lisp

The latter form (standard procedure definition) is syntactic sugar for

@lisp
(define ⟨@var{var}⟩
  (lambda (⟨@var{param₁}⟩ @r{…} ⟨@var{paramₙ}⟩)
    ⟨@var{body}⟩))
@end lisp

The corresponding syntax procedures are the following:

@lisp
(define (definition? exp)
  (tagged-list? exp 'define))

(define (definition-variable exp)
  (if (symbol? (cadr exp))
      (cadr exp)
      (caadr exp)))

(define (definition-value exp)
  (if (symbol? (cadr exp))
      (caddr exp)
      (make-lambda 
       (cdadr exp)   @r{; formal parameters}
       (cddr exp)))) @r{; body}
@end lisp

@item
@code{Lambda} expressions are lists that begin with the symbol @code{lambda}:

@lisp
(define (lambda? exp) 
  (tagged-list? exp 'lambda))
(define (lambda-parameters exp) (cadr exp))
(define (lambda-body exp) (cddr exp))
@end lisp

We also provide a constructor for @code{lambda} expressions, which is used by
@code{definition-value}, above:

@lisp
(define (make-lambda parameters body)
  (cons 'lambda (cons parameters body)))
@end lisp

@item
Conditionals begin with @code{if} and have a predicate, a consequent, and an
(optional) alternative.  If the expression has no alternative part, we provide
@code{false} as the alternative.@footnote{The value of an @code{if} expression
when the predicate is false and there is no alternative is unspecified in
Scheme; we have chosen here to make it false.  We will support the use of the
variables @code{true} and @code{false} in expressions to be evaluated by
binding them in the global environment.  See @ref{4.1.4}.}

@lisp
(define (if? exp) (tagged-list? exp 'if))
(define (if-predicate exp) (cadr exp))
(define (if-consequent exp) (caddr exp))
(define (if-alternative exp)
  (if (not (null? (cdddr exp)))
      (cadddr exp)
      'false))
@end lisp

We also provide a constructor for @code{if} expressions, to be used by
@code{cond->if} to transform @code{cond} expressions into @code{if}
expressions:

@lisp
(define (make-if predicate 
                 consequent 
                 alternative)
  (list 'if 
        predicate 
        consequent 
        alternative))
@end lisp

@item
@code{Begin} packages a sequence of expressions into a single expression.  We
include syntax operations on @code{begin} expressions to extract the actual
sequence from the @code{begin} expression, as well as selectors that return the
first expression and the rest of the expressions in the
sequence.@footnote{These selectors for a list of expressions---and the
corresponding ones for a list of operands---are not intended as a data
abstraction.  They are introduced as mnemonic names for the basic list
operations in order to make it easier to understand the explicit-control
evaluator in @ref{5.4}.}

@lisp
(define (begin? exp) 
  (tagged-list? exp 'begin))
(define (begin-actions exp) (cdr exp))
(define (last-exp? seq) (null? (cdr seq)))
(define (first-exp seq) (car seq))
(define (rest-exps seq) (cdr seq))
@end lisp

We also include a constructor @code{sequence->exp} (for use by @code{cond->if})
that transforms a sequence into a single expression, using @code{begin} if
necessary:

@lisp
(define (sequence->exp seq)
  (cond ((null? seq) seq)
        ((last-exp? seq) (first-exp seq))
        (else (make-begin seq))))

(define (make-begin seq) (cons 'begin seq))
@end lisp

@item
A procedure application is any compound expression that is not one of the above
expression types.  The @code{car} of the expression is the operator, and the
@code{cdr} is the list of operands:

@lisp
(define (application? exp) (pair? exp))
(define (operator exp) (car exp))
(define (operands exp) (cdr exp))
(define (no-operands? ops) (null? ops))
(define (first-operand ops) (car ops))
(define (rest-operands ops) (cdr ops))
@end lisp

@end itemize

@subsubheading Derived expressions

Some special forms in our language can be defined in terms of expressions
involving other special forms, rather than being implemented directly.  One
example is @code{cond}, which can be implemented as a nest of @code{if}
expressions.  For example, we can reduce the problem of evaluating the
expression

@lisp
(cond ((> x 0) x)
      ((= x 0) (display 'zero) 0)
      (else (- x)))
@end lisp

@noindent
to the problem of evaluating the following expression involving @code{if} and
@code{begin} expressions:

@lisp
(if (> x 0)
    x
    (if (= x 0)
        (begin (display 'zero) 0)
        (- x)))
@end lisp

@noindent
Implementing the evaluation of @code{cond} in this way simplifies the evaluator
because it reduces the number of special forms for which the evaluation process
must be explicitly specified.

We include syntax procedures that extract the parts of a @code{cond}
expression, and a procedure @code{cond->if} that transforms @code{cond}
expressions into @code{if} expressions.  A case analysis begins with
@code{cond} and has a list of predicate-action clauses.  A clause is an
@code{else} clause if its predicate is the symbol @code{else}.@footnote{The
value of a @code{cond} expression when all the predicates are false and there
is no @code{else} clause is unspecified in Scheme; we have chosen here to make
it false.}

@lisp
(define (cond? exp) 
  (tagged-list? exp 'cond))
(define (cond-clauses exp) (cdr exp))
(define (cond-else-clause? clause)
  (eq? (cond-predicate clause) 'else))
(define (cond-predicate clause) 
  (car clause))
(define (cond-actions clause) 
  (cdr clause))
(define (cond->if exp)
  (expand-clauses (cond-clauses exp)))
(define (expand-clauses clauses)
  (if (null? clauses)
      'false     @r{; no @code{else} clause}
      (let ((first (car clauses))
            (rest (cdr clauses)))
        (if (cond-else-clause? first)
            (if (null? rest)
                (sequence->exp 
                 (cond-actions first))
                (error "ELSE clause isn't 
                        last: COND->IF"
                       clauses))
            (make-if (cond-predicate first)
                     (sequence->exp 
                      (cond-actions first))
                     (expand-clauses 
                      rest))))))
@end lisp

@noindent
Expressions (such as @code{cond}) that we choose to implement as syntactic
transformations are called @newterm{derived expressions}.  @code{Let}
expressions are also derived expressions (see 
@ref{Exercise 4.6}).@footnote{Practical Lisp systems provide a mechanism that allows a user
to add new derived expressions and specify their implementation as syntactic
transformations without modifying the evaluator.  Such a user-defined
transformation is called a @newterm{macro}.  Although it is easy to add an
elementary mechanism for defining macros, the resulting language has subtle
name-conflict problems.  There has been much research on mechanisms for macro
definition that do not cause these difficulties.  See, for example, @ref{Kohlbecker 1986}, 
@ref{Clinger and Rees 1991}, and @ref{Hanson 1991}.}

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 4.2}Exercise 4.2:} Louis Reasoner plans to reorder the
@code{cond} clauses in @code{eval} so that the clause for procedure
applications appears before the clause for assignments.  He argues that this
will make the interpreter more efficient: Since programs usually contain more
applications than assignments, definitions, and so on, his modified @code{eval}
will usually check fewer clauses than the original @code{eval} before
identifying the type of an expression.

@enumerate a

@item
What is wrong with Louis's plan?  (Hint: What will Louis's evaluator do with
the expression @code{(define x 3)}?)

@item
Louis is upset that his plan didn't work.  He is willing to go to any lengths
to make his evaluator recognize procedure applications before it checks for
most other kinds of expressions.  Help him by changing the syntax of the
evaluated language so that procedure applications start with @code{call}.  For
example, instead of @code{(factorial 3)} we will now have to write @code{(call
factorial 3)} and instead of @code{(+ 1 2)} we will have to write @code{(call +
1 2)}.

@end enumerate
@end quotation

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 4.3}Exercise 4.3:} Rewrite @code{eval} so that the
dispatch is done in data-directed style.  Compare this with the data-directed
differentiation procedure of @ref{Exercise 2.73}.  (You may use the @code{car}
of a compound expression as the type of the expression, as is appropriate for
the syntax implemented in this section.)
@end quotation

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 4.4}Exercise 4.4:} Recall the definitions of the
special forms @code{and} and @code{or} from @ref{Chapter 1}:

@itemize @bullet

@item
@code{and}: The expressions are evaluated from left to right.  If any
expression evaluates to false, false is returned; any remaining expressions are
not evaluated.  If all the expressions evaluate to true values, the value of
the last expression is returned.  If there are no expressions then true is
returned.

@item
@code{or}: The expressions are evaluated from left to right.  If any expression
evaluates to a true value, that value is returned; any remaining expressions
are not evaluated.  If all expressions evaluate to false, or if there are no
expressions, then false is returned.

@end itemize

Install @code{and} and @code{or} as new special forms for the evaluator by
defining appropriate syntax procedures and evaluation procedures
@code{eval-and} and @code{eval-or}.  Alternatively, show how to implement
@code{and} and @code{or} as derived expressions.
@end quotation

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 4.5}Exercise 4.5:} Scheme allows an additional syntax
for @code{cond} clauses, @code{(⟨@var{test}⟩ => ⟨@var{recipient}⟩)}.  If
@code{⟨}@var{test}@code{⟩} evaluates to a true value, then @code{⟨}@var{recipient}@code{⟩} is evaluated.
Its value must be a procedure of one argument; this procedure is then invoked
on the value of the @code{⟨}@var{test}@code{⟩}, and the result is returned as the value of
the @code{cond} expression.  For example

@lisp
(cond ((assoc 'b '((a 1) (b 2))) => cadr)
      (else false))
@end lisp

@noindent
returns 2.  Modify the handling of @code{cond} so that it supports this
extended syntax.
@end quotation

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 4.6}Exercise 4.6:} @code{Let} expressions are derived
expressions, because

@lisp
(let ((⟨@var{var₁}⟩ ⟨@var{exp₁}⟩) @r{…} (⟨@var{varₙ}⟩ ⟨@var{expₙ}⟩))
  ⟨@var{body}⟩)
@end lisp

@noindent
is equivalent to

@lisp
((lambda (⟨@var{var₁}⟩ @r{…} ⟨@var{varₙ}⟩)
   ⟨@var{body}⟩)
 ⟨@var{exp₁}⟩
 @r{…}
 ⟨@var{expₙ}⟩)
@end lisp

Implement a syntactic transformation @code{let->combination} that reduces
evaluating @code{let} expressions to evaluating combinations of the type shown
above, and add the appropriate clause to @code{eval} to handle @code{let}
expressions.
@end quotation

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 4.7}Exercise 4.7:} @code{Let*} is similar to
@code{let}, except that the bindings of the @code{let*} variables are performed
sequentially from left to right, and each binding is made in an environment in
which all of the preceding bindings are visible.  For example

@lisp
(let* ((x 3)
       (y (+ x 2))
       (z (+ x y 5)))
  (* x z))
@end lisp

@noindent
returns 39.  Explain how a @code{let*} expression can be rewritten as a set of
nested @code{let} expressions, and write a procedure @code{let*->nested-lets}
that performs this transformation.  If we have already implemented @code{let}
(@ref{Exercise 4.6}) and we want to extend the evaluator to handle @code{let*},
is it sufficient to add a clause to @code{eval} whose action is

@lisp
(eval (let*->nested-lets exp) env)
@end lisp

@noindent
or must we explicitly expand @code{let*} in terms of non-derived expressions?
@end quotation

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 4.8}Exercise 4.8:} ``Named @code{let}'' is a variant
of @code{let} that has the form 

@lisp
(let ⟨@var{var}⟩ ⟨@var{bindings}⟩ ⟨@var{body}⟩)
@end lisp

The @code{⟨}@var{bindings}@code{⟩} and @code{⟨}@var{body}@code{⟩} are just as in ordinary @code{let},
except that @code{⟨}@var{var}@code{⟩} is bound within @code{⟨}@var{body}@code{⟩} to a procedure whose body
is @code{⟨}@var{body}@code{⟩} and whose parameters are the variables in the @code{⟨}@var{bindings}@code{⟩}.
Thus, one can repeatedly execute the @code{⟨}@var{body}@code{⟩} by invoking the procedure
named @code{⟨}@var{var}@code{⟩}.  For example, the iterative Fibonacci procedure 
(@ref{1.2.2}) can be rewritten using named @code{let} as follows:

@lisp
(define (fib n)
  (let fib-iter ((a 1) (b 0) (count n))
    (if (= count 0)
        b
        (fib-iter (+ a b) 
                  a 
                  (- count 1)))))
@end lisp

Modify @code{let->combination} of @ref{Exercise 4.6} to also support named
@code{let}.
@end quotation

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 4.9}Exercise 4.9:} Many languages support a variety of
iteration constructs, such as @code{do}, @code{for}, @code{while}, and
@code{until}.  In Scheme, iterative processes can be expressed in terms of
ordinary procedure calls, so special iteration constructs provide no essential
gain in computational power.  On the other hand, such constructs are often
convenient.  Design some iteration constructs, give examples of their use, and
show how to implement them as derived expressions.
@end quotation

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 4.10}Exercise 4.10:} By using data abstraction, we
were able to write an @code{eval} procedure that is independent of the
particular syntax of the language to be evaluated.  To illustrate this, design
and implement a new syntax for Scheme by modifying the procedures in this
section, without changing @code{eval} or @code{apply}.
@end quotation

