@node	4.1.6, 4.1.7, 4.1.5, 4.1
@subsection Internal Definitions

Our environment model of evaluation and our metacircular evaluator execute
definitions in sequence, extending the environment frame one definition at a
time.  This is particularly convenient for interactive program development, in
which the programmer needs to freely mix the application of procedures with the
definition of new procedures.  However, if we think carefully about the
internal definitions used to implement block structure (introduced in 
@ref{1.1.8}), we will find that name-by-name extension of the environment may
not be the best way to define local variables.

Consider a procedure with internal definitions, such as

@lisp
(define (f x)
  (define (even? n)
    (if (= n 0)
        true
        (odd? (- n 1))))
  (define (odd? n)
    (if (= n 0)
        false
        (even? (- n 1))))
  ⟨@var{rest of body of @code{f}}⟩)
@end lisp

@noindent
Our intention here is that the name @code{odd?} in the body of the procedure
@code{even?} should refer to the procedure @code{odd?} that is defined after
@code{even?}.  The scope of the name @code{odd?} is the entire body of
@code{f}, not just the portion of the body of @code{f} starting at the point
where the @code{define} for @code{odd?} occurs.  Indeed, when we consider that
@code{odd?} is itself defined in terms of @code{even?}---so that @code{even?}
and @code{odd?} are mutually recursive procedures---we see that the only
satisfactory interpretation of the two @code{define}s is to regard them as if
the names @code{even?} and @code{odd?} were being added to the environment
simultaneously.  More generally, in block structure, the scope of a local name
is the entire procedure body in which the @code{define} is evaluated.

As it happens, our interpreter will evaluate calls to @code{f} correctly, but
for an ``accidental'' reason: Since the definitions of the internal procedures
come first, no calls to these procedures will be evaluated until all of them
have been defined.  Hence, @code{odd?}  will have been defined by the time
@code{even?} is executed.  In fact, our sequential evaluation mechanism will
give the same result as a mechanism that directly implements simultaneous
definition for any procedure in which the internal definitions come first in a
body and evaluation of the value expressions for the defined variables doesn't
actually use any of the defined variables.  (For an example of a procedure that
doesn't obey these restrictions, so that sequential definition isn't equivalent
to simultaneous definition, see @ref{Exercise 4.19}.)@footnote{Wanting programs
to not depend on this evaluation mechanism is the reason for the ``management
is not responsible'' remark in @ref{Footnote 28} of @ref{Chapter 1}.  By
insisting that internal definitions come first and do not use each other while
the definitions are being evaluated, the @abbr{IEEE} standard for Scheme
leaves implementors some choice in the mechanism used to evaluate these
definitions.  The choice of one evaluation rule rather than another here may
seem like a small issue, affecting only the interpretation of ``badly formed''
programs.  However, we will see in @ref{5.5.6} that moving to a model
of simultaneous scoping for internal definitions avoids some nasty difficulties
that would otherwise arise in implementing a compiler.}

There is, however, a simple way to treat definitions so that internally defined
names have truly simultaneous scope---just create all local variables that will
be in the current environment before evaluating any of the value expressions.
One way to do this is by a syntax transformation on @code{lambda} expressions.
Before evaluating the body of a @code{lambda} expression, we ``scan out'' and
eliminate all the internal definitions in the body.  The internally defined
variables will be created with a @code{let} and then set to their values by
assignment.  For example, the procedure

@lisp
(lambda ⟨@var{vars}⟩
  (define u ⟨@var{e1}⟩)
  (define v ⟨@var{e2}⟩)
  ⟨@var{e3}⟩)
@end lisp

@noindent
would be transformed into

@lisp
(lambda ⟨@var{vars}⟩
  (let ((u '*unassigned*)
        (v '*unassigned*))
    (set! u ⟨@var{e1}⟩)
    (set! v ⟨@var{e2}⟩)
    ⟨@var{e3}⟩))
@end lisp

@noindent
where @code{*unassigned*} is a special symbol that causes looking up a variable
to signal an error if an attempt is made to use the value of the
not-yet-assigned variable.

An alternative strategy for scanning out internal definitions is shown in
@ref{Exercise 4.18}.  Unlike the transformation shown above, this enforces the
restriction that the defined variables' values can be evaluated without using
any of the variables' values.@footnote{The @abbr{IEEE} standard for Scheme
allows for different implementation strategies by specifying that it is up to
the programmer to obey this restriction, not up to the implementation to
enforce it.  Some Scheme implementations, including @abbr{MIT} Scheme, use
the transformation shown above.  Thus, some programs that don't obey this
restriction will in fact run in such implementations.}

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 4.16}Exercise 4.16:} In this exercise we implement the
method just described for interpreting internal definitions.  We assume that
the evaluator supports @code{let} (see @ref{Exercise 4.6}).

@enumerate a

@item
Change @code{lookup-variable-value} (@ref{4.1.3}) to signal an error if
the value it finds is the symbol @code{*unassigned*}.

@item
Write a procedure @code{scan-out-defines} that takes a procedure body and
returns an equivalent one that has no internal definitions, by making the
transformation described above.

@item
Install @code{scan-out-defines} in the interpreter, either in
@code{make-procedure} or in @code{procedure-body} (see @ref{4.1.3}).
Which place is better?  Why?

@end enumerate
@end quotation

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 4.17}Exercise 4.17:} Draw diagrams of the environment
in effect when evaluating the expression @code{⟨}@var{e3}@code{⟩} in the procedure in the
text, comparing how this will be structured when definitions are interpreted
sequentially with how it will be structured if definitions are scanned out as
described.  Why is there an extra frame in the transformed program?  Explain
why this difference in environment structure can never make a difference in the
behavior of a correct program.  Design a way to make the interpreter implement
the ``simultaneous'' scope rule for internal definitions without constructing
the extra frame.
@end quotation

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 4.18}Exercise 4.18:} Consider an alternative strategy
for scanning out definitions that translates the example in the text to

@lisp
(lambda ⟨@var{vars}⟩
  (let ((u '*unassigned*)
        (v '*unassigned*))
    (let ((a ⟨@var{e1}⟩)
          (b ⟨@var{e2}⟩))
      (set! u a)
      (set! v b))
    ⟨@var{e3}⟩))
@end lisp

Here @code{a} and @code{b} are meant to represent new variable names, created
by the interpreter, that do not appear in the user's program.  Consider the
@code{solve} procedure from @ref{3.5.4}:

@lisp
(define (solve f y0 dt)
  (define y (integral (delay dy) y0 dt))
  (define dy (stream-map f y))
  y)
@end lisp

Will this procedure work if internal definitions are scanned out as shown in
this exercise?  What if they are scanned out as shown in the text?  Explain.
@end quotation

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 4.19}Exercise 4.19:} Ben Bitdiddle, Alyssa P. Hacker,
and Eva Lu Ator are arguing about the desired result of evaluating the
expression

@lisp
(let ((a 1))
  (define (f x)
    (define b (+ a x))
    (define a 5)
    (+ a b))
  (f 10))
@end lisp

Ben asserts that the result should be obtained using the sequential rule for
@code{define}: @code{b} is defined to be 11, then @code{a} is defined to be 5,
so the result is 16.  Alyssa objects that mutual recursion requires the
simultaneous scope rule for internal procedure definitions, and that it is
unreasonable to treat procedure names differently from other names.  Thus, she
argues for the mechanism implemented in @ref{Exercise 4.16}.  This would lead
to @code{a} being unassigned at the time that the value for @code{b} is to be
computed.  Hence, in Alyssa's view the procedure should produce an error.  Eva
has a third opinion.  She says that if the definitions of @code{a} and @code{b}
are truly meant to be simultaneous, then the value 5 for @code{a} should be
used in evaluating @code{b}.  Hence, in Eva's view @code{a} should be 5,
@code{b} should be 15, and the result should be 20.  Which (if any) of these
viewpoints do you support?  Can you devise a way to implement internal
definitions so that they behave as Eva prefers?@footnote{The @abbr{MIT}
implementors of Scheme support Alyssa on the following grounds: Eva is in
principle correct---the definitions should be regarded as simultaneous.  But
it seems difficult to implement a general, efficient mechanism that does what
Eva requires.  In the absence of such a mechanism, it is better to generate an
error in the difficult cases of simultaneous definitions (Alyssa's notion) than
to produce an incorrect answer (as Ben would have it).}
@end quotation

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 4.20}Exercise 4.20:} Because internal definitions look
sequential but are actually simultaneous, some people prefer to avoid them
entirely, and use the special form @code{letrec} instead.  @code{Letrec} looks
like @code{let}, so it is not surprising that the variables it binds are bound
simultaneously and have the same scope as each other.  The sample procedure
@code{f} above can be written without internal definitions, but with exactly
the same meaning, as

@lisp
(define (f x)
  (letrec
      ((even?
        (lambda (n)
          (if (= n 0)
              true
              (odd? (- n 1)))))
       (odd?
        (lambda (n)
          (if (= n 0)
              false
              (even? (- n 1))))))
    ⟨@var{rest of body of @code{f}}⟩))
@end lisp

@code{Letrec} expressions, which have the form

@lisp
(letrec ((⟨@var{var₁}⟩ ⟨@var{exp₁}⟩) @r{…} (⟨@var{varₙ}⟩ ⟨@var{expₙ}⟩))
  ⟨@var{body}⟩)
@end lisp

@noindent
are a variation on @code{let} in which the expressions
@math{{⟨\kern0.1em exp_k⟩}} that provide the initial values for the
variables @math{{⟨\kern0.06em var_k⟩}} are evaluated in an environment
that includes all the @code{letrec} bindings.  This permits recursion in the
bindings, such as the mutual recursion of @code{even?} and @code{odd?} in the
example above, or the evaluation of 10 factorial with

@lisp
(letrec
    ((fact
      (lambda (n)
        (if (= n 1)
            1
            (* n (fact (- n 1)))))))
  (fact 10))
@end lisp

@enumerate a

@item
Implement @code{letrec} as a derived expression, by transforming a
@code{letrec} expression into a @code{let} expression as shown in the text
above or in @ref{Exercise 4.18}.  That is, the @code{letrec} variables should
be created with a @code{let} and then be assigned their values with
@code{set!}.

@item
Louis Reasoner is confused by all this fuss about internal definitions.  The
way he sees it, if you don't like to use @code{define} inside a procedure, you
can just use @code{let}.  Illustrate what is loose about his reasoning by
drawing an environment diagram that shows the environment in which the
@code{⟨}@var{rest of body of @code{f}}@code{⟩} is evaluated during evaluation of the
expression @code{(f 5)}, with @code{f} defined as in this exercise.  Draw an
environment diagram for the same evaluation, but with @code{let} in place of
@code{letrec} in the definition of @code{f}.

@end enumerate
@end quotation

@quotation
@strong{@anchor{Exercise 4.21}Exercise 4.21:} Amazingly, Louis's intuition in
@ref{Exercise 4.20} is correct.  It is indeed possible to specify recursive
procedures without using @code{letrec} (or even @code{define}), although the
method for accomplishing this is much more subtle than Louis imagined.  The
following expression computes 10 factorial by applying a recursive factorial
procedure:@footnote{This example illustrates a programming trick for
formulating recursive procedures without using @code{define}.  The most general
trick of this sort is the @math{Y} @newterm{operator}, which can be used to give a
``pure λ-calculus'' implementation of recursion.  (See @ref{Stoy 1977} for
details on the λ-calculus, and @ref{Gabriel 1988} for an exposition of the
@math{Y} operator in Scheme.)}

@lisp
((lambda (n)
   ((lambda (fact) (fact fact n))
    (lambda (ft k)
      (if (= k 1)
          1
          (* k (ft ft (- k 1)))))))
 10)
@end lisp

@enumerate a

@item
Check (by evaluating the expression) that this really does compute factorials.
Devise an analogous expression for computing Fibonacci numbers.

@item
Consider the following procedure, which includes mutually recursive internal
definitions:

@lisp
(define (f x)
  (define (even? n)
    (if (= n 0)
        true
        (odd? (- n 1))))
  (define (odd? n)
    (if (= n 0)
        false
        (even? (- n 1))))
  (even? x))
@end lisp

Fill in the missing expressions to complete an alternative definition of
@code{f}, which uses neither internal definitions nor @code{letrec}:

@lisp
(define (f x)
  ((lambda (even? odd?)
     (even? even? odd? x))
   (lambda (ev? od? n)
     (if (= n 0) 
         true 
         (od? ⟨??⟩ ⟨??⟩ ⟨??⟩)))
   (lambda (ev? od? n)
     (if (= n 0) 
         false 
         (ev? ⟨??⟩ ⟨??⟩ ⟨??⟩)))))
@end lisp
@end enumerate
@end quotation

